TITLE: The Top 10 Things To Do In Autumn on The Costa Blanca
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1wTSvKqnU7HZbl-8D1ncbkvOwYHf4xhTvD8ycInAao_s
---
The Top 10 Things To Do In Autumn on The Costa Blanca
Holidaymakers flock to Spain during the summer months thanks to the promise of great weather and warm waters. And whilst the weather may not be as reliable in autumn and the sea not as warm, for those in the know, autumn is one of the best times to visit the Costa Blanca.


There are so many amazing things to do when the temperatures drop a little and the leaves begin to change. And guess what? On warm days, you can still head to some of the best beaches on the Costa Blanca and you might even have them all to yourself!


Here are some of our favourite things to do in autumn on the Costa Blanca so you can make the most of this beautiful season and stunning part of Spain.


The Top 10 Things to Do In Autumn on The Costa Blanca
#1. Enjoy The Grape Harvest Festivals
The Costa Blanca is a fabulous wine-growing region and you can find bodegas (vineyards) dotted along the coast. Different grape varieties are ready to be harvested at different times during the year but the majority have their harvest season in early autumn.


It’s the perfect opportunity to taste local wine, meet the growers and learn all about the wine, grapes and growing season. Bottles of wine are often cheaper and many of the festivals attract local food vendors selling artisanal cheeses and meats.


#2. Go To The Beach!
This might be more appealing in September rather than November but it’s one of the best times to visit the beach. The crowds have gone, the weather is still warm (and refreshingly not as hot as in August) and you can still swim in the sea. You’ll be able to easily find a table at your favourite beach restaurant and you won’t have a problem renting water sports gear, such as SUPs and kayaks to explore the coast.


#3. Take a Trip to The Balearic Islands
The Costa Blanca covers the most easterly point of the Spanish peninsula, which is the part closest to the Balearic islands. Ferries run most days in early autumn from Dénia to Ibiza, Formentera and Mallorca. Because it’s out of season, prices are generally lower and there are way fewer people than there are in summer!


#4. Visit a Beautiful Inland Village
The Costa Blanca is home to some stunning inland villages. Most people only consider beach resorts in the area but villages up in the mountains or inland are perfect for seeing a different side of the region. Whilst many of them are stunning in Spring when the almond blossom comes out, the changing red leaves are equally as dramatic as a backdrop.


#5. Go Mushroom Hunting
The Spanish countryside is full of mushrooms during autumn. Going hunting for them is the perfect way to get out, do something fun and enjoy the beautiful nature. In Spain, however, you need a permit to pick mushrooms and, of course, you need to know what you’re doing. As is the case in every country, some of the mushrooms you can find in Spain are poisonous, so it’s best to go as part of a guided group.


#6. Go for a Hike
There are so many great walking, biking and hiking trails along the Costa Blanca and autumn is the perfect time to explore them. In summer you often have to enjoy them very early in the morning before it gets too hot but the autumn weather is ideal for strolling along them in the Spanish sunshine and taking a picnic. Some of the hikes take you inland and up mountains and others along the coast with spectacular views of the Mediterranean. There are trails for all different abilities and experiences.


#7. Visit Parc Natural de Las Lagunas de La Mata y Torrevieja
This amazing nature reserve is known for its salt lagoons, pink water and a variety of plants and birds. You can even see flamingos sometimes! There are guided tours of the salt mines and the park has lots of fabulous trails to enjoy. It’s often too hot to go around in summer, so autumn is the perfect time and many of the birds are migrating too.


#8. Enjoy Alicante
Alicante is the biggest city on the Costa Blanca and a must-visit place for anyone in the region in autumn. Walking up to the Castell de Santa Bàrbara is a highlight of the city but it's often just too hot to do it in summer. Autumn is perfect and there are fewer people in the city too, so there’s less need to reserve in your favourite restaurants and bars too.
#9. Climb the Montgó
One of the most popular regions on the Costa Blanca to buy property is the area of Jávea and Dénia and both of these towns are dominated by the large Montgó mountain that rises into the clouds behind them. It’s definitely too hot to climb the Montgó in summer but autumn is perfect! It’s at its most beautiful in the sun when the colours start to change and the views from the top are truly stunning.


#10. Treat Yourself to Incredible Food
Everyone knows that the food on the Costa Blanca is incredible. From fresh seafood and paellas to cocas and pastries, there’s so much to choose from. But did you know that there’s also an amazing fine dining scene in the region? In fact, there are 13 Michelin-starred restaurants in the province of Alicante alone! They’re the perfect place to try seasonal dishes from Spain and around the world.


Buying Property So You Can Enjoy Autumn on the Costa Blanca
Autumn is a favourite season for many on the Costa Blanca, when they can enjoy the cooler temperatures and the fewer tourists. It’s a stunning time of the year and there are still so many things to do both indoors and outdoors. There’s something for everyone to enjoy.


Get in touch with the team at Bueno if you’d like more information about property banking and how you can keep your money safe while looking for your dream property in Spain.