TITLE: Property Banking Simplified: How a Bueno account can make everything easier
CATEGORY: banking
SOURCE: google-doc 1pQ-SQfdswSSctkz7lXYVi0w7Zs9zjY3vZN7DDBRKsOA
---
Property Banking Simplified: How a Bueno account can make everything easier
One of the key steps to buying property in Spain is opening a Spanish bank account. Not only do you need a Spanish bank account to actually make the purchase but it’s also useful to have one to keep up with utility payments and enjoy life in Spain. But, in our experience, opening a Spanish bank account is one of the most difficult things for expats to do. The process is often complicated with banks in different countries working to different rules and regulations. And, of course, language can be a real hurdle to overcome for many.


That’s why we at Bueno decided to simplify property banking for expats by offering a fully functioning and secure Bueno account.


In this article, we’re going to take you through the main features and benefits of a Bueno account so you can see for yourself how it makes property banking in Spain simpler and more manageable.


What is a Bueno account?
The Bueno account was specifically designed with foreign property owners, buyers and long-term renters in mind. Our experts used their industry knowledge and personal experience to create the perfect, simplified banking solution to problems faced by those wishing to buy or live in Spain.


Our comprehensive financial services platform supports you with all your property-related costs. In fact, we’re the first property-centric banking alternative in Europe, offering our customers support and expert knowledge in several different languages.


Along with your new Spanish payment account, you can also request a Bueno card. This is a Euro debit card that’s ideal for daily spending and you can easily order it from the Bueno app.


How to open a Bueno account
Our goal was to simplify property banking right from the very beginning. That’s why we were the first 100% online banking alternative for non-residents in Spain. You can simply set up your Bueno account online and in minutes. You can then benefit from all of the unique features and manage your account from the web or mobile app.


Unlike other banking alternatives in Spain, there are no complicated forms to fill out, no restrictions to where you live and our multi-national team can support you in your mother tongue to make it as easy and straightforward as possible.


To make matters even simpler, we’re very transparent about our pricing plans. You can enjoy all the benefits and features of simplified property banking for as little as €9.90 per month or €99 per year.


How does a Bueno account simplify banking in Spain?
Any foreigner who has ever tried to open a bank account in Spain knows how difficult it is. We, however, wanted to take the most complicated aspects of property banking and make them accessible for all.


When you open an account with Bueno, you receive a Spanish IBAN account. This is ideal for paying utility bills and handling day-to-day spending in Spain. You also need a Spanish IBAN account to transfer the funds for your property purchase.


Our accounts are fully licensed by the Bank of Spain (Banco de España) and 100% of your deposits are held in segregated accounts with regulated banks, we don’t invest or lend out your money. You can rest assured knowing that making transfers is safe and very simple.


Furthermore, we’ve partnered with Currencies Direct to help you make significant savings when transferring money from other currency accounts to your Bueno account. They offer excellent exchange rates and no transfer fees – something that can get very complicated and expensive with traditional Spanish banks.


We’ve also made it really easy to switch bank accounts in Spain, something which, again, can easily get complicated and you often incur hidden fees. If you need assistance switching your direct debits our team will assist you so that changing bank will be np hassle at all. As a priority, we’ve made our platform easy and convenient for all our customers to use. You can control your finances and transfers from wherever you are using the app. It includes everything you possibly need in a clear format and provides state-of-the-art security to ensure your money is always safe.


Something which really sets Bueno apart from other banking platforms is our first-hand experiences and local knowledge. We know how exciting yet overwhelming buying property on the Costa Blanca can be and we’ve faced many of the common problems ourselves in the past. The Bueno account is designed as a simplified solution for property banking and our expert team from around the world provides personalised support to make every aspect of property purchasing and management easier.


Ready to experience the benefits of a Bueno account yourself?
If you’re thinking of buying property in Spain or if you’re already an owner, you can really benefit from the simplified property banking offered by a Bueno account. Everything you need for purchasing and property management is at your fingertips, along with customer support offered by a team of multi-lingual Spanish property experts.


You can rest assured knowing that your money is safe and secure and easily transfer funds in multiple currencies with the help of our trusted partners. Opening a bank account in Spain as a foreigner doesn’t have to be complicated. In fact, with Bueno, it’s property banking, simplified. Apply for a Bueno account and start seeing the benefits of straightforward banking with security and customer support at the heart of it.