TITLE: Understanding Spain's New Cash Withdrawal Rules and Possible Penalties
CATEGORY: banking
SOURCE: google-doc 1uSL7allHNeA1evrAmRzGZs92_MSM-A1xadvBrTij-ZM
---
Understanding Spain’s New Cash Withdrawal Rules and Possible Penalties


Governments across Europe are implementing new laws and regulations in an attempt to combat tax evasion, money laundering and the shadow economy. Spain is no exception and has implemented various restrictions in the last few years.


One of the more recent regulations is a change in the amount you can withdraw without notifying the Spanish Tax Agency (Agencia Tributaria). From now on, if you decide to withdraw more than €3,000 or amounts involving €500 notes, you must report it to the Spanish Tax Agency.


So, what are the possible consequences of withdrawing large amounts? What fines may you have to pay? And how does the new rule affect expats living in Spain?


Here’s everything you need to know to ensure compliance and avoid potential penalties.


Spain’s Cash Withdrawal Rules (And What’s Changed)
In Spain, there’s no nationwide cap on how much cash you can withdraw from an ATM. Different banks in Spain set their own withdrawal limits, and these sometimes differ depending on whether the ATM is more remote or not. For example, Bank Sabadell allows €600 per transaction, whereas CaixaBank permits up to €1,200.


The new regulations, however, which came into effect in 2025, mean that anyone withdrawing amounts of over €3,000 must report it to the tax office in advance. A 24-hour notification is mandatory. For those wishing to withdraw €100,000 or more, you’ll need to notify the tax office 72 hours in advance.


You should notify the tax office via their website and you’ll need proof of ID. You might also have to provide proof of the source of funds. You’ll then receive a certificate which you must present at the bank when withdrawing your sum.


What About Large Cash Transfers?
Any large cash transfer within Spain exceeding €100,000, including buying property, must be declared to the tax agency using the S1 form. If you also wish to transfer more than €10,000 to someone, you’ll require documentation proving the origin of the funds.


Are There Cash Payment Limits in Spain?
As well as limits to how much you can withdraw from an ATM in Spain, there are also limits to general cash payments in the country. These differ depending on whether they involve private individuals, foreigners or businesses.


Transactions involving a business: For example, buying goods or services from a professional. The maximum cash payment in this scenario is €1,000.


Transactions involving private individuals: The maximum cash payment between private individuals, such as friends, is also €1,000.


Transactions involving non-residents not acting as professionals: This is where it differs slightly. Non-residents have a maximum cash payment of €10,000 if they don’t live in Spain and aren’t paying taxes there.


What Are The Penalties for Not Complying With Spain’s Cash Withdrawal Regulations?
For minor infractions of Spain’s cash withdrawal regulations, fines can be up to 50% of the transaction amount. Serious infractions can range from 50%-100%, and very serious infractions, especially if fraudulence comes into play, can see a 100%-150% fine.


If either the payer or the payee report the violation to the Spanish tax authorities within three months of the payment, they may be exempt from the penalty.


How Much Cash Can You Bring Into Spain?
Travellers going to Spain can bring €10,000 (or the equivalent in other currencies). Any amount above that will need to be declared to the customs authorities.


Failing to declare more than €10,000 will result in fines which could be up to 50% of the undeclared amount.


How Much Cash Can You Legally Carry With You In Spain?
You’re allowed to carry up to €100,000 in cash in Spain without needing to declare it. If you’re found to have more than €100,00 cash on you, police have the right to question its origin and whether it’s officially been declared to the Spanish tax agency (using the S1 or S2 form).


Failure to declare the money could result in it being seized or a hefty fine.
Recommendations for Expats Living in Spain
There are several things that expats in Spain can do to ensure they don’t receive fines when dealing with cash in the county.


Stay informed. One of the most important is to stay up to date with changes in regulations and laws. You can check out the Bueno blog for updates on all things Spanish property banking and how new rules may affect you.


Individual bank policies. It’s always good to check your bank’s specific withdrawal limits and practices. Speak to someone at the bank if you’re unsure. Of course, if you have a Bueno account, you can speak to one of our multilingual experts, who can let you know about the latest changes and developments.


Document transactions. You should always keep receipts and records of large transactions, withdrawals and proof of payment. It’s best to keep them for at least 5 years in case an audit ever comes up.


Consult Professionals. If you’re unsure, you should speak to a financial advisor or lawyer to make sure that you’re compliant with Spanish regulations.


Cash Withdrawals in Spain – Final Thoughts
With the new regulations in place, it’s important not to withdraw more than €3,000 at any time, without notifying the tax office in Spain. There’s no limit to how much money you can withdraw in Spain, but larger sums (above €3,000) need to be registered if you want to avoid paying a fine. The government has implemented these rules in an attempt to reduce illegal activity and fraud.


If you’re unsure how the new regulations may impact you or your cash usage, get in touch with your bank or financial advisor. Those with a Bueno account can contact the team at Bueno for more information about withdrawals and limits.