TITLE: Christmas on the Costa Blanca: The Best Way to Celebrate
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1c-xdcCHXXopDB9a1dDNSqdn8cP8daZf0HEnN97J0CgY
---
Christmas on the Costa Blanca: The Best Way to Celebrate
Scarves, ice skating, and twinkly lights aren’t exactly what come to mind when you think of the Costa Blanca. This region of Spain usually conjures up images of perfect beaches, crystal-clear water, and paellas looking out over vineyards. But Christmas is also a really popular time to visit the region, especially for those wanting to escape the grey skies and bitter chill of northern Europe.


It’s very unlikely that you’ll have a white Christmas, but you will be able to enjoy 18°C, wonderful Christmas markets, unique Spanish traditions and plenty of good food.


Here’s your guide to Christmas on the Costa Blanca so you can plan the perfect holiday season.


Christmas Traditions on The Costa Blanca
Christmas on the Costa Blanca, and generally in Spain, is a little different from other European and UK countries – and not just because the sun is shining. They have their own ways of celebrating which are great to watch and participate in.


#1. When Are Presents Exchange and Who Brings Them?
One of the biggest differences between Spain and other European countries is that most families don’t actually celebrate Christmas with Santa Claus. Instead, the Three Kings traditionally bring children presents on the 6th of January.


Spaniards still celebrate Christmas Eve and Christmas Day though, and some even exchange smaller gifts on the 24th.


Something else that differs when it comes to Christmas on the Costa Blanca is that Boxing Day, or the 26th of December, isn’t a holiday day! Many people go back to work and most shops and restaurants open like normal. Of course, there are a lot of international businesses on the Costa Blanca, and some may remain closed on Boxing Day.


#2. What Do Spaniards Eat at Christmas?
Unlike in the UK, where most people are prepping a turkey for Christmas, there’s no set meal in Spain. On Christmas Eve, you can expect to have an array of tapas, meats, seafood, and fish. Some families on the Costa Blanca also eat paella on Christmas Day!


Something that’s a very popular Christmas treat all over Spain, and that comes from a town on the Costa Blanca, is Turrón. Turrón, which originated in Jijona close to Alicante, is a kind of almond nougat with honey. It’s often given as a gift and enjoyed over the Christmas period.


On the Day of the Three Kings, the 6th of January, many Spanish families have another large lunch followed by a Roscón de Reyes, a kind of cream-filled pastry. The one whose slice has a bean in it has to pay for next year’s Roscón and the one who has a little king figure will have a year of luck!


#3. Christmas Decorations on The Costa Blanca
Most of the top towns to buy property on the Costa Blanca have beautiful Christmas lights to enjoy. A great place to see Christmas lights is in the old town of Jávea. There’s often a Christmas tree in the town square and a nativity scene called a belén. But don’t just expect Jesus in a manger with a few animals around him. Beléns in Spain are a big deal and often include running water, a whole village scene and lots of different characters. In fact, in many beléns in Catalonia and the Valencia region, there’s a caganer, a small character pooping that you have to spot!


One of the most spectacular beléns on the Costa Blanca is in Alicante. The characters are enormous and sculpted in the traditional style of the region.


#4. Play The Christmas Lottery
Lottery is a big deal in Spain at Christmas and almost everyone takes part. But it’s a little different from other countries. El Gordo, the name of the famous Christmas lottery, happens on the 22nd of December and is designed to try and make as many people as possible win. Lots of people buy 10 tickets of the same number and gift them to family and friends. Each ticket could be worth €400,000!


Several people have won on the Costa Blanca. In fact, in 2023, people won first prize in Elche, Alicante, Benidorm, Torrevieja and Santa Pola!


Christmas Events on The Costa Blanca
There are lots of events held up and down the coast to celebrate Christmas. They’re perfect for getting in the spirit, buying gifts and seeing how Christmas is celebrated in Spain.


#1. Christmas Markets
Christmas markets are really common in Spain. There are several traditional and modern ones happening all over the Costa Blanca. Here are some of the best-known ones:


Alicante, Central Square. This large Christmas market runs from roughly the 14th-23rd of December. You can find hand-crafted gifts, roasted nuts, live music, and lots of Turrón to enjoy!


Calpe, Old Town. This Christmas fair runs during the first week of December and is a great way to explore the city and get in the festive spirit!


Jávea, Old Town and Port. There are two great markets in Jávea, including one along the port over the long weekend in December and one in the old town square that starts mid-December.


Teulada, Town Hall Square. This is a wonderful market starting mid-December. You can find all the usual stalls and there’s also a daily visit from Santa!


#2. Kings Parade
For many Spanish kids, the most exciting day of Christmas is the 5th of January when the 3 kings arrive in towns all over the country. They’re arriving to deliver the presents that night and the parades are full of thousands of people lining the streets.


Because the Costa Blanca is on the coast, many of the kings arrive at the coastal towns via boat! One such place is Jávea. Kids can enjoy storytelling and arts and crafts in the port as they await for the kings to arrive. They can then line the streets and follow the kings to the old town as they throw sweets and small presents to the crowds.


One of the best-kept secrets across Spain is how the kings will arrive for each parade. They’ve arrived on camels and have even been known to land in a helicopter!


There are also Three Kings parades in Calpe, Alicante, Moraira, Dénia and Torrevieja, to name a few.


#3. New Year's Eve on the Costa Blanca
One of the most unique Christmas traditions in Spain happens on New Year’s Eve. In the 12 chimes before midnight, Spaniards eat 12 grapes. If you don’t, it’s supposed to bring bad luck for the coming year!


You’ll see people with their bags of grapes gathering in town squares and on the beaches up and down the Costa Blanca, ready to eat them and ring in the new year. Lots of people also drink cava and watch the impressive fireworks displays.


There are fireworks in Calpe, Alicante, Moraira, Benidorm, Dénia, Torrevieja and all over the smaller, inland villages on the Costa Blanca too.
Is It Worth Celebrating Christmas on the Costa Blanca?
If you’ve just bought property or are thinking about buying property on the Costa Blanca, then it’s a great idea to celebrate Christmas in the region. As you can see, there’s plenty going on and lots of wonderful things to do. It’s well worth staying around for the Three Kings Day to really enjoy Christmas in Spain and understand how Spaniards celebrate it.


Get in touch with the team at Bueno to learn how a Bueno bank account and personalised advice for expats can help you manage your property expenses in Spain or get that one step closer to becoming a property owner here.