TITLE: The top 10 beaches for you to enjoy on the Costa Blanca in 2024
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 14EJFStALkDd_n1iPu4h9S81gtKRB9t6Lt_VcCKq3ymw
---
The top 10 beaches for you to enjoy on the Costa Blanca in 2024
The Costa Blanca is known for its stunning scenery, idyllic towns, crystal clear waters and endless days of sun. These are only a couple of the reasons why so many are deciding to invest in property in the area… and that’s before we even talk about the fresh food and kind people. But what about the beaches? Of course, some of Spain’s most beautiful beaches are on the Costa Blanca – but which are the best in 2024?


Here is our guide to the best beaches on the Costa Blanca for you to enjoy this summer. Grab your suncream and get ready to cool off in perfectly turquoise waters on one of Spain’s most beloved coasts.


The best beaches on the Costa Blanca
With over 200 km of coastline, The Costa Blanca is a diverse region in Spain. It’s possible to find large sandy beaches, secluded pebbly ones and a couple of secret ones only the locals know about.


#1. Playa la Granadella
Playa la Granadella is a pebbled beach close to Jávea. This horseshoe-shaped beach offers pristine waters thanks to the seagrass fields close by and dramatic views. It’s surrounded by beautiful cliffs that drop into the water on either side of the bay and is a favourite for snorkellers and those who want to enjoy kayaking or paddle surfing.


You’ll need a car to get to La Granadella, which takes around 15 minutes from Jávea. You can expect this beautiful beach to get crowded in July and August and parking can be difficult, even though there are lots of parking places lining the side of the hill. It’s best to go early in the morning to reserve a spot.


#2. Playa del Centro (Villajoyosa)
The central beach in Villajoyosa runs for 2 km past the beautiful old town and all the way to the marina. It’s a soft, sandy beach with clear water, making it ideal for families. The promenade that’s to the side of the beach is lined with restaurants, ice cream shops and cafes for whenever you need a break from the sun. There are also lots of palm trees along the beach offering shade. Be sure to have a look at Villajoyosa’s famous colourful houses when you’re done on the beach.


#3. Cala del Moraig (Moraira)
Cala del Moraig is one of the wildest and most beautiful beaches on this list. It’s secluded by Mediterranean cliffs that drop dramatically into perfectly blue sea and there’s a great viewpoint from the top. You have to drive to Cala del Moraig and then walk down a pretty steep slope to get to the little bay. Just remember you have to walk back up at the end of the day! The area is home to lots of natural and manmade caves, one of which is on the beach and a popular spot amongst Instagrammers. You can also walk one of the routes along the cliffs before taking a dip in the sea to cool off.


#4. Playa del Carabassí (Arenales del Sol)
Playa del Carabassí is close to the Elche, a beautiful town south of Alicante on the Costa Blanca. It’s a wild and very natural beach, surrounded by dunes and pine forests, meaning it’s not as developed as others on the coast. It’s almost 1 km of fine, golden sand and it’s been awarded a blue flag, highlighting the beach’s sustainability. It’s another popular spot for snorkellers thanks to the diverse marine life it’s home to.


#5. Playa Racó del Albir de Alfaz del Pi
It might not have the easiest name, but this beach is a very popular one on The Costa Blanca. It’s just to the south of Altea and is only 500 m long but it has a wide array of facilities, including sunbeds for those who don’t want to put their towel down on uncomfortable pebbles. You can climb up to the lighthouse in the nearby Sierra Helada and enjoy the shade after time spent enjoying the crystal clear water. The view out over the Mediterranean, nearby cliffs and bay is amazing.


#6. Cala la Fustera (Benissa)
Cala la Fustera is a very small bay close to the popular Costa Blanca property investment town of Benissa. It has beautiful white sand with some rocky areas that are perfect for sunbathing. The sea is a beautiful pale green and the rocks around the beach make it perfect for snorkelling. It’s part of the Paseo Ecologico Trail to Calpe and is a great spot for a quick dip before carrying on with the stunning trail. There’s a beachside restaurant nearby but parking is limited and it can get very busy in the summer months.


#7. Playa del Portet (Moraira)
This beach is one of the most popular amongst locals and tourists in Moraira. It’s not the biggest beach in the world but it is longer than it looks from the entrance. The views out towards the docking boats and open ocean are amazing, as are the Mediterranean cliffs on either side. The water is clean and often calm, meaning it’s an ideal place to bring kids to. There are a couple of great restaurants nearby but it’s best to book in advance, especially in July and August.


#8. Cala Blanca (Jávea)
Cala Blanca is a wonderful, hidden beach in Jávea, accessible on foot through a little hole in the cliff. It’s a tiny, rocky beach that’s naturally in the shape of a pool, making it a favourite for both adults and kids. It gets its name from the amazing white rocks that form the backdrop to this little beach. Whilst there’s only a very small beach to actually lie on, there are plenty of flat rocks around which are a great place to put your towel down. There aren’t any facilities on the beach, so make sure you bring plenty of water and something to eat.


#9. Playa del Postiguet (Alicante City)
This large, sandy beach has made it onto the list because of its wonderful location. Located in the middle of Alicante city, this long beach has great views out over the sea and up towards Castell de Santa Bàrbara, Alicante’s famous castle. It’s a bigger beach than many others on this list, but with that comes many more facilities. You can rent sun loungers and parasols and the promenade behind the beach is full of lively restaurants and cafes.


10. Playa de Cabo Roig (Torrevieja)
This beach is around 10 km south of Torrevieja, but even so, it gets pretty crowded in summer thanks to its protected position. The shape of Playa de Cabo Roig means it’s rarely windy and the sea is often calm. The water is crystal clear and it’s perfect for taking a SUP or kayak and for going snorkelling. You can also go to La Caleta which is close by and you’ll find plenty of chiringuitos (beach bars) and restaurants.


So, which of the best beaches on the Costa Blanca are we missing?
With over 200 km of coastline to choose from, it’s difficult to decide on just 10 of the best beaches on the Costa Blanca. This list includes a mix of bigger city beaches which are great for kids and accessibility and also some lesser-known ones. There are many more incredible beaches to discover in the area, which is why so many people decide to buy property on the Costa Blanca.