TITLE: Cultural Integration: Embracing Spanish Lifestyle as a Property Owner
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1O519dUO1R2eoRQyUWzgqnXnA2r1BV-6HQaJuFUrkdb8
---
Cultural Integration: Embracing Spanish Lifestyle as a Property Owner


Spain is one of the most popular countries in Europe to buy property. A great lifestyle, endless sunny days and fabulous food mean foreigners flock to the country to enjoy it too. While there are several steps to take to buy property in Spain, owning property in the country doesn’t stop there. It’s important you make the most of the culture so you can fully enjoy it too.


In this article, we’re going to share some of the key features of the Spanish lifestyle (it’s way more than adopting a siesta every afternoon) so you can integrate well in your new chosen home.


13 Things About Spanish Culture That Expats Need to Know
1. Language Spoken in Spain
The main language in Spain is Castillian however there are lots of other languages spoken regionally too. These include Catalan, Valencian, Galician, and Basque. If your property is in a more rural area, you might want to try and learn the local language spoken there. But, almost everyone – especially younger generations – also speaks Castilian.


Learning the language goes a long way when integrating into the culture. It shows you’re making an effort to speak to the locals and they really appreciate it.


While we’re on the topic, it’s also worth discussing how language is used in Spain and how it might differ from your native tongue. Spanish is generally more direct, especially more direct than English. Whilst a Brit may be tempted to say ‘Please could you pass the salt’, a Spaniard would say ‘Pass the salt’ and it isn’t considered rude in any way.


2. Timings (And How They Differ)
One of the biggest things for expats to get used to is the different rhythm of life in Spain. Yes, Spaniards eat much later than people do in other countries and, sometimes, restaurants won’t even be open when you’d like to eat, especially in non-touristy areas. It’s not uncommon for Spaniards to eat lunch around 15.30 and dinner around 22.00. They tend to have a light breakfast which usually includes a milky coffee and then enjoy an almuerzo at around 10.30 which tides them over until lunch.


And a siesta doesn’t just mean taking a nap in the afternoon, it means lots of things close for a couple of hours too. For example, shops and restaurants often close during the siesta time and open up again in the evening. Large department stores and busy high streets tend to stay open the whole day.


It’s also important to respect the quiet time. Communal swimming pools close and you shouldn’t do anything too loud during the siesta hours, especially in summer. It’s an important part of integrating into the culture and not annoying your neighbours!


3. Food Is to Be Enjoyed
Meal deals and grab-and-go food don’t really exist in Spain. Food is to be enjoyed, often over a long lunch with friends and family. The Mediterranean diet has long been considered one of the healthiest in the world and you can expect to eat lots of fruits and veggies regularly. Many of the top places to buy property on the Costa Blanca have weekly food markets where you can buy locally sourced produce.


Of course, meat and fish are also big in Spain with some of the most popular tapas dishes being jamón and an array of seafood specialities. Rice dishes are also very popular on the Costa Blanca, including seafood and meat paella – but never with chorizo!


Coffee is served after most meals and it’s usually short and black with a bit of milk or a touch of alcohol. A Spaniard, however, would never order a milky coffee after dinner. It’s a no go!


4. People Are Very Friendly
Spain has a more friendly culture than some other northern European countries (of course that’s very generic but you can notice it)! It’s common to say hello to neighbours and chat with them about their lives, and workers in shops and supermarkets are very welcoming. You can even expect them to call you cariño. Spaniards form strong community bonds and being part of it will really help you to integrate into the culture.


5. Greeting Each Other
Hugging is very common in Spain, as is giving two kisses, typically starting with the right cheek. Men may shake hands, hug, or kiss, depending on how close they are. When meeting friends of friends it is common to greet them like this, as it is with colleagues too. This part of the Spanish lifestyle can be difficult to get used to, especially when you’re not exactly sure of the etiquette at the exact moment. But, the more you practice the more you’ll get used to it!


6. Education in Spain
Education is compulsory for all 6-16 year olds in the country and is free at public schools. There are lots of great international schools too, offering kids the opportunity to study in different languages and follow different curriculums, although these are usually private.


7. Traditional Spanish Festivals
Celebrating is a big part of the Spanish lifestyle and there are countless fiestas all over the country. Most towns and villages have their own annual festivals which are celebrated with music, drinking, dancing and traditional customs. Most of the festivals in Spain originated from religion, with many of them celebrating a specific saint. While this is still the case for many people, they’ve developed into more of a generic party.


Some of the most famous festivals in Spain include Las Fallas in Valencia, Semana Santa, El Día de Reyes Magos, and La Tomatina.


While bullfighting and bull-running are decreasing in popularity in many areas, they’re still traditional in some villages, especially during the fiestas. If it’s not something you’re interested in, there’s always something else to enjoy!


8. Bars in Spain
Bars in Spain are more than just somewhere to get a drink, they’re a big part of the culture. Whether you’re after a coffee, cola or caña (a small beer) they’re a really social place to meet friends. Bars tend to open early in Spain, or at least much earlier than in other countries, and it’s not uncommon to see people having a beer or glass of wine with their almuerzo in the morning. Drinks in bars, however, are almost always served with some form of food, such as nuts, olives or crisps.


9. Art and Culture in Spain
As a property owner in Spain, it's important to know about the rich artistic history of the country.
Francisco Goya, Pablo Picasso, Salvador Dalí, Joan Miró and Diego Velázquez are just a couple of the most famous ones.


Due to the dictatorship in Spain which ended in 1975, many artists had to flee into exile due to the artistic restrictions put on them. This had a significant impact on the art created during the time.


10. Spending Time Outdoors
A big part of the Spanish lifestyle happens outdoors. It’s common for people to meet in cafes, bars and restaurants or just meet for a pre-dinner drink. In summer, it’s most common for people to meet at the beach or after the sun has gone down and the temperatures cool. Spaniards are generally active and there are loads of sports clubs and activities that you can get involved in too.


11. Tipping in Spain
Tipping in Spain isn’t very common and most Spaniards certainly don’t tip much (at least by other European countries’ standards). They may round up to the nearest euro or add a couple of euros to the bill. If you’ve had good service, there’s certainly nothing wrong with tipping but it would be very unusual to tip over 15%.


12. ‘Ahora’ Isn’t Always Now
It’s a cliché but Spaniards aren’t exactly the most punctual people – and that’s quite OK! But just don’t expect timings to work like they do in your home country. If you invite people round, it’s quite possible that they’ll arrive an hour late and find it completely normal. Just plan accordingly and you’ll soon get used to it!


People usually arrive on time for formal appointments and you can often be up to 15 minutes late for a restaurant booking. Just be sure to check when you make the appointment.


13. Silence Isn’t Golden in Spain
Spaniards don’t like silence. Whether it’s in a bar, going for a hike or having a drink, they like to fill almost every second. While this can seem a lot to begin with, especially when everyone’s talking at once (!), it’s also a great opportunity to practice Spanish. Most Spaniards will be really open to helping you learn and will happily slow down to include you in the conversation. But you might have to remind them when it heats up again!


Spanish Lifestyle for Property Owners
The lifestyle in Spain is one of the main reasons why so many people decide to call this Mediterranean country home. The weather and food culture make it a very sociable place to live and it’s pretty easy to meet neighbours, get to know colleagues and make friends. Of course, there are some differences to other European countries which might take a bit of getting used to, but that’s part of the charm of becoming a Spanish property owner!