TITLE: Currency Transfer and Exchange: Best practices
CATEGORY: banking
SOURCE: google-doc 1ZCV8UB-4fAkFrbNgMwPu3niWoxcVDKk0lPF-JuEE2vE
---
Currency Transfer and Exchange: Best practices for holiday home owners and expats moving money to Spain


Finding your dream Spanish home is a fun and daunting process. Not only do you get to look around some amazing properties and imagine yourself enjoying the Spanish sunshine, but there are also lots of complicated contracts and financial processes involved. One of the biggest questions property buyers have is how a currency transfer to Spain will work, the fees involved, and what the easiest way to do it is.


At Bueno, we’re experts in Spanish banking and buying property in the country. That’s why we’ve decided to partner with Currencies Direct to bring you the most secure and hassle-free way of transferring money from overseas to Spain.


How to transfer money to Spain?
Transferring money, especially large sums of money to buy a property, is a big deal. It’s important to get the best exchange rate with the most secure transfer to ensure your funds are kept safe. Anyone who has signed a Contrato de Arras, or Arras Contract, knows that timing is also very important. It’s essential that funds arrive in the designated bank account as quickly as possible - not only for your peace of mind but there’s a chance you can lose your 10% deposit if you fail to complete on time.


Currencies Direct is a trusted partner of ours and their services stand out above the rest. They make sending money abroad simple and their excellent customer support is there to take you through every step of the process.


Your money and your Spanish property are too important to risk with an online platform without customer support. It’s important you get the best exchange rate, with exceptional one-to-one service.


Benefits of a currency transfer to Spain with Currencies Direct
At Bueno, we’re committed to providing our clients with the best and most secure service. After extensive research, we decided that Currencies Direct is the best option for our clients transferring money from overseas. Here are some of the benefits of working with them to make your Spanish property purchase a reality.


Benefit #1: You get a personal account manager
There’s nothing more frustrating than needing the answer to a question and constantly getting diverted to information pages or a customer service chatbot. Sometimes, especially when money is involved, you need to speak to an expert. Your personal account manager at Currencies Direct will help you decide when and how to make your transfer abroad so that it benefits you the most.


Benefit #2: Safety, safety, safety
As it is with Bueno, ensuring your money is safe is a top priority for Currencies Direct. All funds are kept in a segregated client account, separate from any business accounts. You know that from the moment you transfer money with Currencies Direct until it arrives in the designated bank account, your money is protected.


Benefit #3: Get the best exchange rate
Considering exchange rates is always important but especially when transferring large sums of money overseas. Exchange rates change throughout the day and your account manager will help you set up alerts for when they’re at their best for you to make a transfer. This helps to ensure you get the most out of your money and the best exchange rates for Spain.


Benefit #4: No transfer fees
It’s essential that any of our trusted partners are upfront with the fees that they charge. Currencies Direct has no transfer fees, meaning you know exactly how much you're sending and receiving.


Benefit #5: Multiple countries and currencies
You can send money to 120 countries in over 40 currencies! So, no matter whether you’re working with GBP, NOK, or any other currency, you can swiftly and securely pass funds to a euro account.


Benefit #6: Set up regular international payments
If you need to regularly send a currency transfer to Spain, possibly to transfer a pension or pay an overseas mortgage, you need a transfer provider that can deal with automated payments and that allows you to track your payments from an easy-to-use account. This is exactly what Currencies Direct provides, along with no transfer fees and strong exchange rates.


Benefit #7: Excellent customer support
Currencies Direct customer service is available 24/7 to help with any questions you may have or with a transfer. There are also 21 offices in Spain, meaning it doesn’t have to all be online if you’d prefer. Their personal and knowledgeable team will help you make the best transfer at the best time.


So, How is it best to manage a currency transfer to Spain for expats and holiday home owners?
The most important thing when transferring money abroad, especially large sums, is to use a trusted provider who will keep your money secure, use competitive exchange rates, and not charge hidden fees.


At Bueno, we believe that property banking should be simple and transferring money abroad to your Bueno account is part of that. Currencies Direct is a trusted platform that allows you to securely and swiftly send money abroad. They offer excellent customer service, great exchange rates and specialise in large and regular transfers. If you’d like more information about property banking in Spain, the benefits of a Bueno account and how we can support your property purchases, get in touch with the team at Bueno. We’ll be happy to answer any questions you may have and take you through the process.