TITLE: What to Do If Your Spanish Bank Account Gets Frozen
CATEGORY: banking
SOURCE: google-doc 19hb9bsK-SwkALO436qGFoYp98JF8CYBS-nuTkygNAxU
---
What to Do If Your Spanish Bank Account Gets Frozen


Finding out your Spanish bank account has been frozen is enough to make anyone’s stomach drop. Unfortunately, many non-residents with a Spanish bank account don’t find out about their bank account status until they arrive in the country looking for sunshine, only to find out the electricity has been turned off and they’ve got no access to their money.


There are several reasons why a Spanish bank account might be frozen. These can range from suspicious activity to more serious problems such as legal or tax issues.


In this article, we’re going to delve into the reasons why your Spanish bank account might be frozen, the steps you can take to unfreeze it and possibilities for the future so it doesn’t happen again.


Is It Legal for Spanish Banks to Freeze Your Account?
Yes, it’s legal for the bank to freeze your account. Due to the law of Prevention of Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing, a bank is required to request certain documentation needed to identify the owner of the bank account and monitor transfers.


If, for any reason, the bank deems the activity to be suspicious or they’ve been advised that it’s illegal, they can freeze the bank account.


Do Banks in Spain Have to Notify You If They Freeze Your Account?
In general, yes. Spanish bank accounts are required to inform you if they freeze your account. They’ll usually send you a formal letter or communication outlining the reason for the freeze and the necessary steps to resolve the situation.


Sometimes, however, especially if the bank has been frozen due to legal demands, you may receive a notification directly from the relevant authority (for example, the Spanish Tax Agency or Agencia Tributaria) rather than from the bank.


Furthermore, in order to comply with anti-money laundering regulations, the bank may not notify you straight away if they detect suspicious activity on your account. They’ll freeze it in order to stop unwanted funds from being withdrawn and may report the situation to Spain’s Financial Intelligence Unit. In these instances, the bank account owner will be notified later on.


What Does This Mean for Non-Residents in Spain?
Generally, formal communication from your Spanish bank will arrive by post. So, if you’ve bought property in Spain, you need to make sure that you or someone you trust is regularly collecting your post. It’s unusual for non-residents without property in the country to get a Spanish bank account but, if this is your case, you need to make sure all your contact information is up-to-date with the bank and they know where to send correspondence. Where possible, you might also request to receive information online to save time and make it easier.


It’s also worth remembering that correspondence from traditional Spanish banks will be written in Spanish, so if you don’t speak the language, you’ll need to have documentation translated.


Reasons Why Your Spanish Bank Account Might Be Frozen
Reason #1. Lack of Identification Documents
By law, Spanish bank accounts are required to ensure that all documentation relating to accounts is up-to-date and valid. If your passport, foreigners identity card, ID card or residence permit is out of date, this may be why the bank has decided to freeze your account.


In most cases, this scenario can be simply resolved by sending the bank your updated documentation. It will then take a few days to unfreeze your account.


Reason #2. Tax Issues
One of the main reasons why bank accounts are frozen in Spain is due to issues with paying taxes. If you have outstanding taxes, such as unpaid income tax, property tax (IBI), or non-resident income tax, the Spanish tax agency can freeze your account. They often do this as part of a court order for debt collection.


The best way to avoid this from happening is to be aware of exactly what taxes you’re expected to pay and when. There’s plenty of information on the Bueno Blog for you to read about property taxes and fees in Spain so that you can stay on top of your property-related finances.


Reason #3. Unpaid Loans or Mortgages
If you miss a mortgage or loan repayment, your bank will likely freeze your account as part of legal action to recover the debt. Again, the best way to avoid this from happening is to set up direct debits and make sure you’re aware of when repayments are due and organise your finances accordingly.


Reason #4. To Prevent Money Laundering
All banks in Spain must adhere to laws regarding money laundering, fraud and financing terrorist activity. This means that your bank may require you to send them information about your profession or an explanation for certain transactions. If you can’t send them the proof, they may freeze your account.


It’s therefore really important to quickly provide your bank with all the documentation or proof that they need, so your account doesn’t get frozen.


Reason #5. Legal Orders
If you’re involved in a legal dispute, such as a civil lawsuit or a family law case (childcare or divorce), the judge may order your accounts to be frozen. This is so that money cannot be withdrawn or hidden. This is particularly the case if you have a joint account.


If there’s a legal order to freeze your account, there’s not much you can do apart from resolving the issue as quickly as possible to open up your account.


Reason #6. Suspicious Fraudulent Activity
If your bank suspects that you have been the victim of theft or fraud, they may freeze your bank account as a precautionary measure. If they see unusual transactions or large sums being taken out, they’re likely to contact you after freezing the account to make sure.


It’s therefore a good idea to notify your bank if you’re going to make any out-of-the-ordinary transactions or payments in the near future. This could include buying property in Spain or using your Spanish bank card abroad whilst on holiday.


Reason #7. Violation of Banking Terms or Regulations
When you open a bank account in Spain, you’ll have to sign a contract acknowledging the bank’s terms and conditions. If you break these, the bank has the right to freeze your account. This could include providing false data or unusual transactions that the bank deems high-risk.


To avoid your bank being frozen for this reason, make sure you read the terms and conditions carefully and avoid violating them.


How Can Having a Bueno Bank Account Help?
Bueno bank accounts are regulated by the Bank of Spain, meaning we adhere to all laws. So, of course, if a law has been broken or we don’t have sufficient information about the account owner, we may need to freeze the bank account.


However, customer service is at the heart of what we do and our dedicated team speak several languages. This means we can easily explain the reason for the closure and, more importantly, help you to resolve it as quickly as possible. We’re also experts in property banking in Spain and can help with important documentation such as non-resident income tax forms, to ensure payments are made on time and your bank account stays operational.


If you’d like more information about the benefits of opening a Bueno bank account, contact our team today. We'll be happy to take you through the steps and help you to manage your property finances.