TITLE: The Best Golf Courses for Retirees Living in Spain
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1Yv4siUYiL1G0fYc7HlSAmwcFZ6rFOyfJNzl_I4UnCHs
---
The Best Golf Courses for Retirees Living in Spain
Spain is one of the most popular countries in Europe for people to retire to. A great healthcare system, well-priced property, plenty of good weather, local produce and kind people make it a very attractive option. But the social side of living in Spain is another key reason why retirees want to make this country home. There are great opportunities to meet new people, take up a new hobby or travel the country.


With an average of more than 320 sunny days a year, it’s no wonder that golf is such a popular sport for retirees in Spain. More and more incredible courses are popping up all over the country – from the outskirts of some of the major cities to the most desirable seaside towns.


Here are the top 8 golf courses for you to enjoy in Spain.


Top 8 Golf Courses for Retirees in Spain
#1. La Sella Golf (Denia, Costa Blanca)
The first on this list of golf courses in Spain is in Denia, one of the most popular towns to buy property on the Costa Brava. La Sella is a very scenic 27-hole course made up of 3 9-hole courses.


Llebeig is the first of the courses and is a beautiful, south-facing one surrounded by pine trees and with stunning views out over the Montgó Natural Park. Gregal is a little flatter, with some areas of water and Mestral faces north, with a little elevation and incredible views out over the Mediterranean.


It’s a great year-round golf course and is easily walkable, making it a perfectly relaxing option.


#2. Valderrama Golf Club (San Roque, Andalusia)
This beautiful golf course is in the heart of Andalusia, close to the Gibraltar border. It’s known for hosting the 1997 Ryder Cup and has a prestigious name in the world of golf. The Valderrama course has a single 18-hole course with a 9-hole par 3 course.


It’s a well-sized golf course with plenty of greens and challenging holes with the stunning Andalusian scenery as its backdrop.


#3. La Quinta Golf and Country Club (Marbella)
La Quinta is one of the most well-known and popular golf courses in Marbella. It’s nestled between impressive mountains and the Mediterranean, offering spectacular views for those playing there.


It’s located just 6km away from the centre of Marbella, which is one of the most popular cities for foreign retirees.


The course was designed by Manuel Piñero and incorporates the natural surroundings, large trees, natural bunkers, and several water features. It’s made up of 3 9-hole courses which players can combine for more of a challenge. The White Course is the most popular and offers wonderful views of Marbella.


#4. Finca Cortesín Golf Club (Estepona, Costa del Sol)
This is another amazing golf course close to Marbella, in the beautiful coastal town of Estepona. The course is surrounded by natural beauty, including woods, views of the sea and the Sierra Bermeja mountains.


This club is certainly more up-market, but offers luxury amenities and a great, challenging course for those seeking a beautiful and dynamic game of golf. The designer, Cabell B. Robson, has used well placed bunkers, deep lakes and the natural terrain to create one of Spain’s best 18-hole golf courses.


#5. PGA Catalunya Resort (Girona, Costa Brava)
For those wanting to go further north up the coast from the Costa del Sol or Costa Blanca, the Costa Brava boasts plenty of excellent golf courses for retirees. One of the best is the PGA Catalunya Resort in Girona.


The entire Costa Brava region is known for its breathtaking beauty, so it’s no wonder this world-class golf club is renowned for its use of the local terrain. The course has been used in several competitions, including the European Tour’s Spanish Open, and is challenging, yet accessible to different abilities.


It’s a great year round course, offering perfect early morning games in the summer and mild temperatures in winter.


#6. Altea Club de Golf (Altea, Costa Blanca)
This charming golf course is hidden in the hills around the Sierra Bernia mountain, near Altea and just 15 minutes away from Benidorm and Calpe. Of course, in such a beautiful location, you can expect wonderful views of the surrounding landscape.


Altea Club de Golf is actually the oldest golf club on the Costa Blanca. The club welcomes both its members as well as guests, so it’s a great one to try out if you’re unsure or in the area. It has 18 holes, which can either be played as a 9 or 19 hole course.


The facilities at this golf course are also excellent, especially the newly-reformed restaurant which has beautiful views out over the course.


#7. La Cala Resort (Mijas, Costa del Sol)
La Cala Resort is a premium golf course located between Malaga and Marbella, in the idyllic town of Mijas. This whole area is very popular amongst retirees, making it an excellent course for those wanting beauty, scenic views and courses that cater to different abilities.


There are actually 3 courses at La Cala Resort – Champions Course (Par 71), America Course (Par 71) and the Europa Course (Par 71).


Each has a different style but all use the natural landscape, including tree-lined fairways, water hazards, rising greens and well-placed bunkers. The clubhouse and practice facilities are excellent in this resort and they have a good golf academy with professional instructors.


#8. Alcanada Golf Club (Alcudia, Mallorca)
The Balearic Islands are also really popular for buying property in Spain, so it’s hardly a surprise that there are some excellent golf courses for retirees in Mallorca. Alcanada Golf Club, in the north of the island, close to Alcudia, is known for its spectacular views, great course conditions and beautiful location.


Whether you live in the area or are visiting, it’s worth going to Alcanada for a game.


The course was designed by world-famous designer Robert Trent Jones Jr and he perfectly blends Balearic style and scenery with an entertaining and fun golf course. It’s an 18-hole, par 72 course that’s home to water features, rolling terrain, sea views and great facilities. Players can have views of both Alcanada Island and its lighthouse throughout the course.


Are There Good Golf Courses for Retirees in Spain?
Spain is an excellent place for retirees to play golf. The country boasts some of the most beautiful courses in the world, many of which have stunning views of surrounding mountains and the ocean. There are excellent facilities and several cater to different abilities, meaning both new players to golf and those who have years of experience, can enjoy everything on offer.


If you’re looking to buy property in Spain to make your golfing retirement a reality, get in touch with the team at Bueno. We’ll be happy to take you through the process and create a bank account for you to manage all your property (and golfing!) expenses in Spain.