TITLE: Homeowners Association Rules: What Foreigners Need to Know in Spain
CATEGORY: tax
SOURCE: google-doc 1QjiimGBFe7-BKPHxxvvMX7MzMJW1LEUx64N6ZN4ILuw
---
Homeowners’ Association Rules: What Foreigners Need to Know in Spain
If you’re thinking about buying property in Spain, especially an apartment or individual house in a shared residential development, then you need to know all about the Comunidad de Propietarios (Community of Owners). This legal collective is established to manage and maintain common areas within the property and address issues that may arise over time.


All owners within the building or development need to pay monthly or quarterly fees which correspond to how big their property is. For example, if you own a large penthouse, you’ll pay more community fees than a smaller apartment on the ground floor.


But, whilst some other countries such as the US are familiar with the notion of a homeowners’ association, there are a couple of important differences that any Spanish property owner needs to be aware of.


In this article, we’ll take you through the most important aspects of homeowners’ associations in Spain so you know exactly the role you’ll play and the rules that need to be followed.


What’s The Role of a Homeowners’ Association and Why Is It Necessary?
Homeowners’ associations are there to ensure that shared spaces in a property complex are properly maintained and kept functioning. This can include cleaning hallways and staircases, gardening, maintaining the lift, pool cleaning and other services that everyone benefits from. Without a legal structure such as this, it would be difficult to know who is responsible for what, leading to disputes and the inefficient running of common areas.


The homeowners’ association provides a legal structure so that everyone pays their fair share and contributes to the overall running and appearance of the communal areas.


How Exactly Does a Homeowners’ Association Work?
Homeowners’ associations in Spain are governed by the Ley de Propiedad Horizontal. This law was first enacted in 1960 but has been updated several times over the years. It’s an essential framework that organises the rights and responsibilities of homeowners in a shared property complex.


Each owner automatically becomes a member of the homeowners’ association and must follow the rules decided upon. In most cases, property owners pay community fees quarterly and tend to pay a little more, which is called a surplus.


All of the common community fees, such as cleaning and maintenance, are split between all the owners and slightly more money is added on to cover unexpected costs or future plans. For instance, every ten years or so, your community may decide to paint the facade or do some more major upkeep of the pool area. This is often paid for with the surplus, so you don’t need to fork out extra money unexpectedly.


Large and more expensive plans for the building can work differently. For example, if your building decides to put a lift in, all owners will need to share the costs. If, however, you live on the ground floor and vote against having a lift put in, you may not need to pay, but you won’t get a key to be able to use the lift.


In some cases similar to this, property owners on the higher floors may pay more. This is because their property will increase a lot in value with the addition of a lift and certainly more than one on the first floor.


Components of a Homeowners’ Association in Spain
Several aspects combine to make up the homeowners association. The basics stay the same from property to property but individual associations can also decide on rules for their common areas.


President of the Community: The president of the community is the representative and is there to ensure decisions get made and meetings are called when necessary. In many buildings, the president is elected from one of the property owners. In other cases, owners rotate every year.


Administrator: Some associations decide to hire an external administrator to take charge of the running of the property and collecting fees. Most community contributions in Spain are set up as direct debits, although some may collect cash and give you a receipt. The administrator will also be responsible for organising repairs and dealing with complaints.


General Assembly of Owners: All owners become part of the general assembly. There’s a yearly meeting where everyone, led by the president, decides on budgets, planned repairs, issues and improvements to common areas.


Extra Rules and Regulations: There are mandatory rules as laid out by the Ley de Propiedad Horizontal but homeowner associations can also decide on their own rules for common areas. This can include quiet time around the pool (siestas are an important part of the Spanish lifestyle), noise levels, how common areas are used and whether pets are allowed in the building.
What Happens If You Don’t Pay Your Fees?
If the property you buy is part of a homeowners’ association, you’ll be obliged to pay your share of the community fees. It’s therefore really important to have a lawyer look through your contract so you know exactly how much you’ll be expected to pay every month or quarter.


Refusing to pay will lead to legal action which may even result in the seizure of your home and the public sale of your property at auction.


What Happens If You Buy a Property with Previous Debts?
One of the most important documents to get before you make an offer on a property and sign the Arras Contract is the Nota Simple. In Spain, debts of community contributions are attached to the property, not the owner – which means they get passed on. The Nota Simple allows you to see if there are any debts on the property and, if there are, the amount can be deducted from the selling price.


How Often Do Homeowners’ Association Meetings Take Place?
Most buildings and complexes have annual meetings, however, some may have more than one per year. Owners must be given a minimum notice of 3 days, although most presidents give 2 weeks notice.


All owners who regularly pay contributions have a vote and it’s also possible to vote by proxy on important matters.


What If You Don’t Agree With a Community Vote?
In most cases, a majority vote wins when it comes to homeowners’ associations in Spain. So, when you buy the property, it’s also worth checking if someone owns more than one property in the building or complex, as they’ll have a bigger percentage of the vote.


There are a couple of instances in which votes can be revoked, including ones that are contrary to the law or that are detrimental to the community.


Homeowners’ Association in Spain – Final Thoughts
The concept of a community of owners can be a new one for many. Paying out every quarter can also be surprising for foreigners, which is why it’s essential to know in advance how much you’ll be expected to pay so that you can budget accordingly. At the end of the day, paying community fees is just another part of being a property owner in Spain. It ensures that communal areas are well-maintained and helps with the longevity of the building.


Setting up a Bueno bank account is one of the best ways to easily manage community fees and other property finances. You can access your Spanish bank account online or via the app and easily transfer money from other accounts and currencies with great exchange rates! Contact the team at Bueno to make managing your Spanish property finances simple and efficient!