TITLE: IBI Tax in Spain: What It Is, How It Works, and How to Pay It
CATEGORY: tax
SOURCE: google-doc 1bIvSXoUQ4t7KBg2wciPFjMT9xbSepBS8drpf3BV9d6c
---
IBI Tax in Spain: What It Is, How It Works, and How to Pay It Easily
Buying property in Spain is a dream for many. The sun, sea and relaxed Mediterranean pace of life are certainly attractive. But once you’ve purchased your perfect Spanish property and the keys are in your hand, you need to understand the local responsibilities that come with owning your new home.


One of the most important (and often overlooked) is the IBI tax, otherwise known as ‘Impuesto Sobre Bienes Inmuebles’. This tax is something every homeowner must pay, whether you live in Spain full-time or only visit a few times a year.


Many foreign buyers are surprised by the different types of taxes that they have to pay once they’ve bought a property in Spain. But, IBI is actually one of the simplest to manage – as long as you know what it is, how it’s calculated and when it’s due.


In this guide, we’ll explain everything you need to know about IBI tax in Spain. From what it covers and how to pay it, to what happens if you miss the payment. We’ll also show you how having a Bueno Spanish bank account makes it easy to stay on top of your property payments from anywhere in the world.


What Is IBI Tax in Spain?
‘Impuestos Sobre Bienes Inmuebles’ translates to ‘Tax on Real Estate Assets’. It’s an annual local tax that you pay to your municipal council (local tax office), and it's similar to paying council tax in the UK or property tax in the US.


The money goes towards maintaining local services like rubbish collection, street lighting, parks and infrastructure, so it’s an essential contribution to the community that every property owner must pay.


How Is IBI Tax Calculated?
Your IBI bill isn’t plucked from thin air – it’s calculated using a specific formula based on two main factors: your property’s cadastral value and your municipality’s tax rate.


The property’s cadastral value (valor cadastral) isn’t the same as the market value. It’s an official valuation assigned to your property by the Spanish Land Registry and is typically lower than the market value, although not always. The cadastral value takes into account the property’s location, size, age and characteristics.
Your local council then applies a municipal tax rate to this cadastral value, which varies significantly depending on the location of your property. Santander, Zaragoza and Madrid all have fairly low IBI rates, whereas some places in Catalunya and on the Costa Blanca can be a bit higher. On average, across Spain, the IBI tax value ranges from 0.3% to 1.1%.


Who Has to Pay IBI Tax in Spain?
The short answer is everyone who owns property in Spain. Whether you buy there to rent, to only use for a few weeks over summer, or to live in permanently, you’ll need to pay IBI tax.


When you buy a property, your details are updated at the land registry, so the local council knows who to send the tax bill to. It’s therefore really important that you check that all IBI has been paid by the previous owner before you buy the property, as unpaid IBI can remain attached to the property, and you may need to pay it. You can find out more information about how to find out if there’s unpaid IBI with a Nota Simple here.


When and How Do You Pay IBI Tax in Spain?
IBI is usually paid once a year. The exact payment period varies by location, but many municipalities issue bills between May and October. You’ll receive a ‘Recibo de IBI’ (the annual bill) by post or electronically. This document contains the amount owed, the payment deadline and how to pay.


Because the ‘Recibo de IBI’ can arrive by post, it’s essential that your correspondence address is correct or that someone regularly checks your post box if you’re not living there. Some local councils may not send letters abroad, so you need to ask for electronic notifications instead.


There are three main ways to pay your IBI tax in Spain.


* Direct Debit from a Spanish bank account. This is the easiest way to ensure you don’t miss any payments, especially if you live abroad and you might not always get the letter.
* Online payment. You can usually do this via your town hall’s website.
* In person. You can go to your local tax office to pay your IBI.




Is IBI The Same as Non-Resident Income Tax?
Being a property owner in Spain, you might have heard of Non-Resident Income Tax (you might even have already paid it)! Many people confuse Non-Resident Income Tax with IBI, but they’re completely separate.
IBI is paid to your local council, whereas Non-Resident Income Tax is a national tax paid to the Spanish Tax Office. The Non-Resident Income Tax applies to income earned in Spain, for example, through renting out your property.


Even if you don’t rent out your property, non-residents usually need to file an annual tax return declaring a small amount of income based on the property’s cadastral value.


What Happens If You Don’t Pay IBI?
Not paying your Spanish IBI tax can have serious consequences. If you miss a payment, your local town hall will first send you a reminder letter. If you still don’t pay, late payment interest and surcharges are added to the initial amount. These start at around 5% and increase to 20% or more if ignored.


Eventually, unpaid IBI can lead to debt collection procedures. These can include:
* Seizure of money from your Spanish bank account
* Charges placed against your property
* Difficulties arising when trying to sell your home


If you’ve inherited a property with unpaid IBI, or you’ve fallen behind with payments for one reason or another, don’t ignore the problem. Contact the town hall as soon as possible to discuss payment plans or solutions. They’re usually willing to negotiate, especially if you demonstrate willingness to settle the debt.


Paying IBI Tax – Tips for Foreign Property Owners
Buying property in a foreign country comes with its struggles, especially when it comes to juggling different systems, languages and paperwork. But there are a few things to do to make sure you’re on top of paying your IBI tax, so you don’t face any nasty consequences down the line.


* Confirm your contact details (so you can receive bills electronically)
* Don’t rely on paper mail. Many councils no longer send bills abroad.
* Set up a direct debit and keep your Spanish bank account active so you never miss a payment.
* Keep a record of all your paper receipts.


The easiest way to stay on top of your IBI payments is to open a Bueno Spanish bank account. It’s designed specifically for foreign property owners, so they can easily set up direct debits to pay tax and other property finances from wherever they are. It’s secure, easy to use and trusted by Spanish property owners from all over the world. Get in contact with the multi-lingual team at Bueno to set up your account, so you can enjoy your Spanish home knowing your tax payments are all up to date.