TITLE: Interior Villages to Explore on The Costa Blanca
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1ytWttssBUpA0ymika2aCOZ8wLVTiLrCQtR2QU4mxNGA
---
Interior Villages to Explore on The Costa Blanca
The Costa Blanca is known all over Europe for its stunning beaches and crystal clear waters. In fact, there are so many great beaches on the Costa Blanca that many people don’t explore the more rural, inland areas of the region. This, honestly, means you’re missing out on beautiful villages and stunning scenery.


Whilst most of us love to come to the Costa Blanca for its wonderful beaches and rocky coves, there’s always time for a day or afternoon exploring some of the equally beautiful interior villages close by. What’s more, it’s the perfect thing to do in the cooler months!


Top 7 Interior Villages on The Costa Blanca
#1. Gata de Gorgos
Gata de Gorgos is a small village to the north of the Costa Blanca in the Marina Alta region. It’s just a 15-minute drive from the popular Spanish property towns of Javéa and Dénia and is certainly considered one of the most beautiful non-seaside towns on the Costa Blanca.


It’s famous for its winding streets full of beautiful shops selling wicker items, including furniture, accessories and decoration. There are also lots of markets in Gata, including a weekly market on Friday mornings and wine festivals throughout the season.


It’s the perfect place to spend a lazy afternoon, do some shopping and even enjoy one of the many amazing restaurants in the village.


#2. Jesús Pobre
Jesús Pobre is another pretty village on the Costa Blanca and just a short drive from Gata de Gorgos. Located at the base of the Montgó mountain, Jesús Pobre offers amazing views, hikes and nature activities.


It’s a traditional Spanish village surrounded by almond and orange trees, vines and beautiful olive groves. Like many of the villages in the area, it’s home to plenty of festivals and celebrations, especially during the summer months. Many villages along the Costa Blanca are famous for their Moscatel wine and it’s particularly prevalent in Jesús Pobre. There are lots of wine tastings and festivals during harvest season.


#3. Xaló and Llíber
The Xaló Valley is the perfect place to head to if you want a bit of peace and quiet and to enjoy the Costa Blanca’s stunning countryside. The valley is surrounded by almond trees, so it’s particularly beautiful in spring when the landscape pops with bright pink flowers. It’s also a really famous region for wine, including the desert wine Mistela.


There are a couple of vineyards around Xaló and Llíber and they’re perfect for trying local wine. Xaló market is well-known throughout the Costa Blanca and is the perfect place to find a bargain. As well as antiques, you can also buy herbs, clothes, local food, decorations and furniture.


There are lots of really beautiful walks around Xaló and Llíber for all levels of fitness and it’s a popular destination from January to December.


#4. Benissa
Benissa is one of the oldest towns on the Costa Blanca and is full of charm and beauty. It’s 275m above sea level and has some truly stunning views out over the Mediterranean. Benissa is a beautiful mix of history, culture, great beaches and modern architecture. You can see prehistoric cave paintings in the surrounding areas and Roman artefacts have been found there too.


The winding cobbled streets are home to boutiques and shops selling local artefacts. There are lots of great restaurants and cafes too and it’s the perfect place to stroll around and enjoy all the beautiful buildings. There’s a lively market every Saturday that sells handmade items and local produce.


Some of the best beaches on the Costa Blanca are close to Benissa too, so it’s a win-win!


#5. Alcalalí
Alcalalí is another wonderful village a little further along the Xaló Valley. As is the case for much of the area, it’s full of beautiful almond and orange trees which make it a popular hiking destination, especially when the blossom is out.


There’s a stunning church in the middle of Alcalalí and the village itself is surrounded by vine-covered slopes and mountains. There’s a lovely community in Alcalalí and there are plenty of events and festivals throughout the year.


From high up in the village, you can even get distant views of the Mediterranean.


#6. Guadalest
Guadalest is a pretty hilltop town in the mountains behind Benidorm and Altea. The town and valley offer spectacular views, especially from the little castle in the middle of the town which is about 500m above sea level. There’s also a reservoir close to the village and the bright blue of the water contrasts amazingly with the rich, surrounding vegetation.


Guadalest is a great place to base yourself or go on a day trip if you fancy exploring waterfalls, scrambling up to castles and seeing some of the best views on the Costa Blanca. It’s also pretty close to the beaches and you can easily get there on a day trip from Benidorm, Altea and Calpe.


#7. Polop de la Marina
Polop de la Marina, or Polop for short, is a beautiful and fascinating town not far from Guadalest. The castle is the main attraction in Polop and was fought over for centuries. It’s a beautiful walk along the cobblestone streets that wind their way around medieval houses up to the Church of San Pedro. As you can imagine for a beautiful village on the Costa Blanca, Polop de la Marina has wonderful views over the surrounding hills and all the almond and orange trees.


There are loads of walking and bike trails around Polop de la Marina so it’s a popular place for outdoor adventurers. It’s also not far from Altea and Benidorm, so is a great day trip location if you fancy a break from the beach.


So, Is It Worth Going to The Interior Villages on The Costa Blanca?
Absolutely! Although stunning, the coast is only part of what the region has to offer. There are so many incredible places to discover that are just a short drive from the beach. You can go on a hike or simply stroll around beautiful villages, taking in all the culture, nature, history and stunning views of the surrounding valleys.