TITLE: The 10 Best Places to Invest in Property in Spain
CATEGORY: banking
SOURCE: google-doc 1-JlZHrtOqLKZr32ZvpUmbGFafYalYdmz66vNKLvqFyo
---
The 10 Best Places to Invest in Property in Spain
Spain continues to be one of Europe’s most attractive property markets for international buyers. Property prices, the Mediterranean way of life, great rental returns and excellent healthcare offer so much value compared to many Northern European countries.


But with so many stunning regions to choose from, where should you invest your money?


Do you want a beautiful, bougainvillea-draped villa 10 minutes from the beach? Or a charming apartment in one of Spain’s vibrant cities?


In this guide, we’re going to take you through the top 10 best places to buy property in Spain in 2026. Whether you’re looking for a holiday villa on the Costa Blanca, a permanent retirement home or a city apartment to rent out, we’ll give you expert insights to help you make the right investment decision.


Understanding The Spanish Real Estate Market
Spain’s property market is very dynamic. It’s continuously growing, making it a great investment opportunity. Some of the larger cities and more touristy holiday spots have seen significant price increases over the last few years. However, if you can afford to buy there, they’re likely to continue increasing in price, and the rental opportunities are endless.


It’s essential to do your research and work out what type of property you want and whether you plan to rent it out or not.


In recent years, Spain has cracked down on illegal and short-term rentals aimed at tourists in a bid to tackle its housing problem. That means that in some popular property buying places, such as Barcelona, it will no longer be possible for new rentals to legally rent out their property short-term, as they’ve stopped issuing tourist licenses.


Before you put an offer in on your dream Spanish property, you need to do your research, especially if you want to take advantage of renting it out. There are also several extra costs to consider, such as taxes and fees. A great reference point is the Bueno Blog, where you can find all the information you need for investing in property in Spain.


10 Best Locations to Buy Property in Spain in 2025
#1. Madrid: Capital City Investment
Madrid is definitely one of the more expensive places to buy property in Spain, but it also has one of the most reliable property markets in Europe. It offers excellent long-term value, high rental demand, and a diverse mix of properties.


As Spain’s political and business hub, Madrid attracts a constant flow of professionals, students and international workers, ensuring year-round rental demand that coastal properties can’t always guarantee.


It’s also extremely well-connected to the rest of Spain and Europe. The metro system is great, meaning that buying on the outskirts of the city could also be a possibility, where you can find more affordable options.


#2. Barcelona: Cosmopolitan Mediterranean Living
Barcelona has long been one of the most popular cities in Spain to both visit and buy property. It’s full of charm, has an amazing culinary scene and is located on the Mediterranean Sea. You can find everything in Barcelona, from modern and spacious apartments to quirky flats in some of the city’s cultural neighbourhoods.


But, like Madrid, Barcelona is getting ever more expensive. The Catalan government has also implemented strict regulations on tourist rentals, meaning investors should primarily focus on long-term rental markets or permanent residencies for them. It is, however, a very attractive option, especially because you can mix beach life with one of Europe’s most exciting cities.


#3. Valencia: The Up and Coming City
Spain’s 3rd largest city was always a little behind Madrid and Barcelona when it comes to tourist numbers and those willing to invest in property. But, in recent years, its great weather, appealing property prices and investment potential have made it a popular destination for foreign buyers. The combination of urban seaside living and more space for your money means it’s one of the best places to buy property in Spain.


There’s an excellent quality of life in Valencia, which massively adds to its overall appeal. It’s famous for its local Spanish food, the city is well connected to other parts of Spain and Europe, and you’re close to some of the best beaches in the country.


Prices have increased over the last few years as the city’s popularity grows, but it’s still more affordable than larger cities in the country.


#4. The Costa Blanca: An International Favourite
The Alicante Province is one of the most attractive areas in Spain for international buyers. This stunning Mediterranean coastline stretches from Dénia in the north to Torrevieja in the south, offering a huge array of property options from luxury villas in exclusive areas to modern apartments in bustling coastal towns.


The region enjoys year-round appeal with warm winters and hot summers, excellent transport links via Alicante-Elche Airport and a well-established international community that makes integration easier for foreign buyers. The cute towns as well as the best beaches on the Costa Blanca are what really make it such a desirable property-buying destination.


#5. Málaga: The Capital of The Costa del Sol
Málaga is a property market leader with property prices increasing steadily, especially in prime beachfront areas and desirable urban neighbourhoods. The Costa del Sol’s capital has evolved from a tourist gateway into a thriving business hub, attracting remote workers, digital nomads and international companies.


Like Valencia and Barcelona, Málaga is also on the beach, meaning you can perfectly combine urban living with the classic Mediterranean way of life. The city’s airport provides excellent connectivity to European cities, making it ideal for buyers who’ll split time between Spain and their home country.


#6. Balearic Islands: Island Paradise
Mallorca, Menorca, Ibiza and Formentera make up Spain’s stunning Balearic Islands. As well as being popular places to go on holiday, these incredible islands located off the east coast of Spain are notorious for property investment.


Of course, there are plenty of luxury property opportunities in the Balearic Islands – think sprawling villas with plenty of land and sea views. But you can also find some cheaper apartments or older, rural buildings in need of reforming.


The beauty, laid-back atmosphere and wonderful rental options in the Balearic Islands make them a great place to buy property in Spain.


#7. Alicante: The Forgotten City
Many people tend to focus on the larger cities when buying property in Spain, but cities like Alicante are a great bet.


Alicante is a medium-sized city on the Costa Blanca in the perfect location for exploring inland villages, other cities such as Valencia, some of Spain’s best beaches and going on trips to Andalusia in just a few hours.


Alicante is a bustling city where locals and holiday makers sit shoulder to shoulder, enjoying incredible food, beautiful architecture and a lively nightlife.


Neighbourhoods on the outskirts of the city are more affordable, and there’s great public transport to take you to the centre. A little further afield, you can find plenty of beautiful villas with sea views (or views of Alicante’s famous castle), but still within travelling distance of the old town centre.


#8. Seville: For Authentic Andalusian Charm
Seville is a fantastic city that captures the romantic essence of Spain – flamenco, tapas culture, stunning architecture and passionate local traditions. It’s become more of a tourist hotspot in the last few years, with many international travellers adding it to their list of places to visit in Spain.


This increase in tourism has made Seville a popular destination to buy property, especially in the historic old town and picturesque Santa Cruz districts. The city is also a great hub for visiting other places in Andalusia, such as Cordoba and Granada.


Unlike the other coastal and urban markets on this list, buying property in Seville is a more authentic property investment. It’s less international than other cities, a little more traditional and has a strong local economy.


It does, however, get very hot in the summer months, and there isn’t a beach nearby, which might not suit everyone!


#9. Marbella: Upmarket Luxury and International Appeal
Marbella is another popular place to buy property on the Costa del Sol. Located south of Málaga, it’s a popular tourist destination loved by celebrities and holiday-makers alike.


Of course, it’s easy to find top-class luxury properties in Marbella, especially modern builds designed for international buyers. But you can also find beautiful, traditional villas on the outskirts of the city that allow you to have more space, but still within driving distance to the beautiful beaches around Marbella.


Because of its famous name, prices can be pretty high in Marbella. But if it’s a city within budget, it offers great returns on investment and year-long rental opportunities.


#10. Costa Brava: Dramatic Scenery and Fewer Tourists
The Costa Brava is one of the most stunning coastlines in Spain. It’s full of pine-covered rocks that fall into deep turquoise coves, but it’s also dotted with historic towns that make great places to invest in property.


The rugged Catalan coastline is distinctly different to the Costa Blanca or Costa del Sol and is less touristy during the warmer months (that’s not to say tourists don’t go, it can still get very full, there just aren’t quite as many). It’s a popular destination for French holidaymakers and a fabulous place to invest in property.


You can find everything from sprawling cliff-side villas to contemporary apartments in the heart of one of the many old towns. Depending on where you buy on the Costa Brava, prices can vary a lot. It’s also worth remembering that there are restrictions in place with regard to tourist licenses and short-term rentals, so you might want to think about mid-term rentals or renting out long-term.


How Can Bueno Help You Purchase Property in Spain?
One of the first steps to buying property in Spain is getting a reliable Spanish bank account. At Bueno, we understand how important property finances are and our experienced team will be happy to set you up with a Bueno account. They’ll take you through all the necessary paperwork so you can concentrate on finding your dream property.


Contact Bueno today for bespoke advice on Spanish property finances and everything you need to know about investing in the country.