TITLE: Key Questions to Ask Before Buying Property in Spain as a Foreigner
CATEGORY: buying
SOURCE: google-doc 1P4hcwdKEFCxcyJgwF__35dAnJvZyUX1fsrF5JPHC9xc
---
Key Questions to Ask Before Buying Property in Spain as a Foreigner
So, you’ve set your heart on buying property in Spain – and, with great weather, friendly people and some great investment potential, who can blame you?


But before you go ahead and start your property search, there are a few key questions you need to ask yourself to ensure you and your finances are kept safe. In this article, we’re going to cover everything from the legalities of buying property in Spain to important questions to ask about specific buildings.


Here are all the questions you need to be aware of before finding your dream home in Spain.


#1. Can Foreigners Legally Buy Property in Spain?
Yes, foreigners can legally buy property in Spain, whether to live permanently in it or as a holiday home. In fact, up until recently, Spain was encouraging foreigners to purchase property through initiatives like the Golden Visa Scheme – where non-EU nationals could get residency in Spain if they purchased property for more than 500,000€. This scheme, however, will end in April 2025.


Due to the current housing crisis in Spain, the Spanish government has announced several plans to make buying property for non-EU citizens harder, such as implementing a 100% property tax and ending the Golden Visa.


Foreigners can still buy and it can be a fantastic investment, they just need to be aware of planned changes and especially how they’ll affect those who are not EU nationals.


#2. What’s The Real Cost of Buying Property in Spain?
Whichever country you’re in, buying and maintaining property is never as simple as just the property price. In Spain, there are a couple of extra property costs foreigners need to be aware of. These include:


* Property buying taxes
* Notary fees
* Legal fees
* Estate agent fees
* Property tax (IBI)
* Community fees
#3. How Do You Know Where to Buy Property in Spain?
This really comes down to personal preference. Of course, there are popular areas that foreigners particularly like to buy property in. These include the major cities, such as Barcelona, Madrid, Valencia and Seville but many people also want beaches close by, and choose areas such as the Costa Blanca, Costa Brava, Costa del Sol and Andalusia.


Competition may be steeper in more popular areas and you can also find incredible hidden gems in more rural settings. It’s important you prioritise where you’d like to live, and what’s important to you (quiet setting or vibrant sense of community) and think about whether you’d like to rent the property as certain areas will be more profitable.


#4. Is It Better to Buy a New Build or a Pre-Owned Home in Spain?
Again, this comes down to preference and what’s available on the Spanish property market when you’re looking. Renovating in Spain can be really rewarding and add a lot of value to a property, however, there are several restrictions that you should be aware of in advance – especially if you’re buying with the sole purpose of renovating.


You also need to be aware of Impuestos sobre Bienes Inmuebles (IBI). This is a yearly tax that every property owner needs to pay in Spain and is based on the cadastral value of the property. It differs from region to region and whether it’s a new build or not, so make sure you find out before purchasing.


Some questions to think about before buying a pre-owned property are:


* How long has it been on the market?
* What are the property costs? (Community fees, utilities, insurance etc.)
* Does the property need any maintenance or repairs?
* Why is the owner selling the property?
* Has the property been previously renovated?
* Are there any outstanding debts on the property? (You’ll need to get a Nota Simple to confirm this anyway).
* What are the neighbours like?


#5. Do You Need a Spanish Bank Account to Buy Property in Spain?
Yes, to buy property in Spain, you’ll need a Spanish bank account. Taxes, deposits and utility bills will all need to be paid from a Spanish IBAN. Opening a Bueno bank account is an easy way for property owners to manage their finances whether they live in Spain or not. Unlike regular Spanish banks, there are no hidden fees (free banking in Spain is rarely ever free) and we offer excellent transfer rates for those earning an income or pension in another currency. It’s simple to set up and our experts are happy to advise on all the essential aspects of buying property in Spain and managing property finances.


#6. Should You Hire a Legal Expert When Buying Property in Spain?
You don’t have to hire a lawyer or property expert when buying in Spain, but we certainly recommend it. Lawyers will help to guide you through the process of buying property in Spain and read over any contracts. Even if you speak Spanish, the process and legal terminology can get complicated.


You should also have the property inspected by an expert who can check for damages, structural concerns or legal issues. This will help to protect your property and money in the future.


#7. What Are The Risks of Buying Property in Spain?
The positives of buying property in Spain way outdo the negatives but, even so, there are some risks potential buyers should be aware of. One such risk is overpaying for the property. If you’re not familiar with the Spanish property market, you may end up paying more than you should.


The Spanish property market rises and falls throughout the year, depending on demand and the season. If you’re looking for a holiday home in a popular area and in summer, you’ll probably pay more than at other points during the year.


Another mistake many foreign buyers make is overlooking the total costs. As mentioned, you need to have considered extra taxes and fees and make sure you’ve budgeted accordingly.


Before buying, you must also be sure that there are no hidden defects or illegal renovations in the property. Once the property is in your name, these will become your issues and can be very expensive to resolve.


#8. Can You Legally Rent Out Your Spanish Property?
Many people buy property in Spain intending to rent it out when they’re not using it. This can be really lucrative, especially if you buy in a holiday destination. However, because of the housing crisis in Spain, the government is making it more and more difficult to rent out accommodation short term. Barcelona, for example, will no longer hand out tourist licences (which you need to rent out property short term) and the city will even revoke the 10,000 property licenses that already exist. The entire country, including the Canary and Balearic Islands, will also hand out much harsher fines and penalties for those renting out accommodation illegally.


If you intend to buy to rent, you must check the laws in your area and the specific regulations for your building or complex. You’ll also need to bear in mind that you’ll need to pay non-resident income tax on your earnings from renting out the property.




Ready to Buy Your Dream Property in Spain?
Spain is an excellent country to live in and buy property. There are so many different kinds of properties on offer and the investment potential is great. However, it’s essential that you check these key questions and find out the answers before making an offer. Familiarising yourself with how the property search and purchasing process works and the pitfalls that can affect foreign buyers will ensure you keep your funds safe and find the perfect home in the sun.


Get in touch with the team at Bueno for help setting up your Spanish bank account or managing property solutions. Our experts will be happy to advise on every aspect of the property banking process.