TITLE: Top 7 Landlord-Tenant Issues in Spain
CATEGORY: buying
SOURCE: google-doc 1BzVrlJM2WC5cV89dvAOmdQ6i4Xc3vuxP-SuxBWySEiY
---
Top 7 Landlord-Tenant Issues in Spain (And How to Avoid Them)
Owning a rental property in Spain can be a fantastic investment. Whether you’re generating extra income from a holiday home or letting out long-term, the rental opportunities in Spain are great.


But like any rental market, things don’t always run smoothly.


For foreign property owners in particular, differences in Spanish law, language barriers and managing everything from another country can be very stressful.


In this guide, we’ll go through the most common landlord-tenant issues in Spain and how you can stay one step ahead.


Most Common Landlord-Tenant Problems
#1. Late or Missed Rent Payments
One of the biggest concerns for landlords is tenants falling behind on rent. Whilst most people pay on time, it can be difficult to deal with those who are late.


Usually, late payments are just a case of tenants forgetting to pay, and they do so within a few days. A polite reminder is always best, as this can prevent the situation from escalating.


But if they’re refusing to pay or they’re very delayed, resolving the problem isn’t always quick. In Spain, the legal process can take time, tenant protections are relatively strong and evictions can be slow compared to other countries like the UK.


How to Avoid The Problem
It’s essential to have the rental terms clearly defined in the rental contract and the date that rent must be paid every month. This helps to avoid any confusion. It’s also important to send any correspondence with the tenant via recorded delivery letter, which can serve as formal proof.


Many rental platforms also insist that rent is paid in advance and kept in a secure account to ensure landlords are always paid on time. You can also ask for a deposit, which covers the waiting time until the rent is paid, should you need it.


Some landlords decide to take out tenant default insurance, which can cover you in the case of non-payment. In some cases, it will also cover legal fees, but you’d need to check this thoroughly.


#2. Property Maintenance Disputes
In long and mid-term rental contracts in Spain, questions around maintenance responsibility often cause tension.


Generally, landlords cover structural issues and major repairs and tenants handle minor wear and tear issues. But often, disputes can arise over broken appliances, air conditioning or heating systems and damp or ongoing maintenance issues.


For foreign owners, coordinating repairs remotely can be challenging, especially in an emergency.


How to Avoid The Problem
Again, the best way to avoid this issue is to have everything clearly written out in the rental contract. You can list what the tenant is responsible for and what responsibilities you will take on.


It’s also a good idea to take a deposit before the tenants move in, so you’re covered in case of any maintenance issues. Many landlords also write mandatory cleaning for longer stays into the rental contract. This helps to keep on top of wear and tear, especially if cleaners do a deep clean and tend to areas otherwise forgotten.


#3. Utility Bills and Payments
Utilities can be one of the biggest practical challenges when setting up property to rent in Spain. Especially in mid and long-term contracts, it’s not always clear who should be paying what.


In Spain, it’s not uncommon for contracts to be in the owner’s name, and they’re usually paid via direct debit from a Spanish bank account. Missed or late payments often result in services being cut off.


How to Avoid The Problem
As with nearly all these issues, the best way to avoid confusion is to state who pays what in the rental contract clearly. For ease, many landlords include utility costs in the rent. They then include a paragraph stating what the maximum amount is, and anything over that must be paid by the tenant (often taken out of the deposit). This helps in summer, for example, when some tenants may use the air conditioning constantly.


#4. Security Deposits
This isn’t something unique to Spain, but it’s still a major landlord-tenant issue. There are often disputes when tenants move out and debates about what is considered normal wear and tear and what is damage.


Damage usually includes:
* Furniture damage
* Poor upkeep
* Unauthorised changes


Handling security deposits and inspections can be difficult for landlords managing properties from abroad.


How to Avoid The Problem
The most important thing is to document everything with the tenant before they move in. Take photos and have them sign an inventory to prove the state of the flat. You then have proof in case anything is damaged. It’s also a good idea to define in the contract what you consider to be damage, so they can sign that too.


#5. Noise, Parties and Neighbour Disputes
Noise and neighbour complaints can be one of the most stressful issues to deal with, especially for landlords living abroad. Generally speaking, this tends to be more of an issue for short-term rentals, but of course, all can be affected.


Problems can include:
* Loud parties or late-night noise
* Pets
* Damage to/not respecting community spaces
* Parking disputes


In some developments or buildings, repeated disturbances can lead to restrictions on renting.


How to Avoid The Problem
Avoiding short-term rentals can help to minimise this problem. It’s not always practical if that’s how you want to rent out your property, but longer-term tenants tend to care more for a property and the neighbours, as they see it as a temporary home.


You can also decline larger groups and prefer to rent to families, although in certain areas, this may limit or reduce your rental potential.


#6. Communication and Language Barriers
Both written and verbal communication are key. Even straightforward situations can become complicated if there’s a language gap.


How to Avoid The Issue
It’s important that whoever organises the check-ins/check-outs for your property speaks both Spanish and English. This means they can explain the key features of the apartment and make sure everything is understood.


It’s also a good idea to have your property contract in English and Spanish, so that there’s no confusion about what’s expected from both parties.


#7. Unauthorised Subleases and Squatting
Unauthorised subletting is when a tenant rents out part or all of the property without permission. This can lead to legal complications and increased wear and tear.


In more serious cases, properties in Spain can be vulnerable to squatting, especially if left empty for long periods of time. While squatting is relatively rare in well-managed, occupied homes, it can be a concern for second-home owners who are away for long stretches. Surprisingly, removing squatters can be a lengthy, complicated, and frustrating legal process – making prevention key.


How to Avoid The Issue
Keeping a close eye on occupancy, ensuring contracts are clear, and staying on top of property activity, including utilities and payments, can help reduce risks. If you suspect your property is being subletted, you can request termination of the tenancy for breach of contract.




Final Thoughts
Being a landlord in Spain is really rewarding and financially worthwhile. But it does come with its responsibilities.


It’s essential to have a detailed contract signed by both parties. This is always the best insurance. If you are living abroad, it’s really important to have someone you trust in Spain as a point of contact for the tenants. They’ll be able to help in case of any issues or emergencies and can help resolve things before they escalate.


As a landlord, having a Spanish bank account can also help to reduce issues. It allows you to track and receive rent payments and pay utilities on time. Get in touch with the multilingual team at Bueno if you have questions about the best set-up as a landlord in Spain.