TITLE: Understanding Leasehold vs. Freehold Properties in Spain
CATEGORY: buying
SOURCE: google-doc 14aN8qBk3Yb6c2_R-nINmGv3EEazjboSsSNG9OV4dhJw
---
Understanding Leasehold vs. Freehold Properties in Spain


If you’re thinking about buying property in Spain, then understanding the legal framework behind ownership is crucial. Like in many other countries in Europe, two key concepts define the rights you receive as a buyer – freehold and leasehold. In Spain, freehold is the standard form of property ownership and means you own the property and the land it sits on for an unlimited amount of time. Whilst much less common, leasehold properties also exist and mean that the property is leased from the landowner for a limited amount of time.


Knowing the differences between the two is essential and will help you avoid any unwanted purchases or surprises down the line.


What Is a Freehold Property in Spain?
Buying a freehold property in Spain means you have full ownership of both the property and the land it stands on – no time limits, no landlord, just complete ownership. This common type of ownership will always be registered in the Land Registry (Registro de la Propiedad), so you have full legal control over selling, renting, getting a mortgage or passing the property on to your heirs.


It’s the most common and straightforward way to buy and own property in Spain, especially for foreign buyers who are looking for residential homes, villas and apartments.


The main advantage of a freehold property in Spain is that you have long-term control and full freedom over your home. You have the right to renovate your Spanish property and only need planning permission, not consent from the landlord.


The main downside of a freehold property in Spain is that you’re responsible for ongoing maintenance, property taxes (such as Non-Resident Income Tax) and community fees. Even so, most Spanish property buyers consider this to be part and parcel of being an owner, and prefer freehold properties to leasehold ones.


What Is a Leasehold Property in Spain?
Leasehold properties in Spain are not very common and certainly less common than in other countries such as the UK.


A leasehold property in Spain gives you the right to use and live in a property for a set period. This is usually between 30 and 99 years. It’s important to remember, however, that you don’t actually own the land underneath and, in most leasehold cases in Spain, don’t own the property either.


Once the lease expires, the rights typically revert back to the freeholder. Although uncommon in Spain’s residential market, this type of property contract can be found in commercial spaces, government-owned land, historic buildings and timeshare developments. Legally, leasehold agreements can be called derecho de uso, usufructo or concesión administrativa, depending on the nature of the contract.


As a foreign property buyer in Spain, it’s really important to check for these phrases and have a lawyer read through your contract. While leasehold properties are often much cheaper and offer more flexibility, they’re always time-limited, may include restrictions on use or resale and can be trickier to finance.


Something else to consider with regard to leasehold properties is their future value. As the lease term runs out, fewer people will think about buying the property as they’ll worry that their time to enjoy it will be cut short. This, therefore, means that leasehold properties sometimes lose value.


What Are The Legal Considerations When It Comes to Freehold vs Leasehold Properties in Spain?
Before signing anything, especially the Arras Contract (El Contrato de Arras), it’s essential to know the legal status of the property. In other words, so you know whether you’re intending to buy a freehold or leasehold property.


In order to do that, you need to request a Nota Simple. There are two ways to do this, including online and in person from your local Land Registry (Registro de la Propiedad) where the property is registered. Online is usually more convenient, but it’s more expensive too.


Nota Simple’s are an essential document because they confirm who legally owns the property, whether it’s freehold or leasehold and whether there are any debts or restrictions attached to it.


It’s also a great idea to work with an experienced property lawyer when buying in Spain. They’ll be able to carry out due diligence, review contracts, spot hidden clauses, and check for unpaid taxes and community fees.


Can You Get A Mortgage for a Leasehold Property in Spain?
Yes, technically you can get a mortgage for a leasehold property in Spain, but it’s much harder and approval depends on several key factors.


In general, Spanish banks prefer freehold properties when it comes to mortgages. From their point of view, freehold properties offer full ownership and long-term security, which means it’s easier for them to recover the investment if needed.


In some limited cases, you might be able to get a mortgage on a leasehold property. These include:


* The lease term is long (there’s at least 60-75 years remaining on it)
* The property is in a very commercial or high-demand location (such as one of the most popular places to buy property on the Costa Blanca)
* You have a very strong financial profile


If you are lucky enough to get a mortgage on a leasehold property in Spain, you can expect the bank to lend a smaller percentage and have higher interest rates or stricter terms.


While this may cause problems for some buyers, the good news is that leasehold properties are usually substantially cheaper than freehold.


Tips for Foreign Buyers in Spain
Regardless of whether you’re thinking of buying a leasehold or freehold property in Spain, it’s essential to get independent legal advice. A lawyer will help confirm the property type before signing the deposit or contract, so you know exactly what type of property you’re buying and the implications that brings.


They’ll also help you to understand how future inheritance, resale and taxes will work.


Freehold vs Leasehold Properties in Spain: Final Thoughts
In most cases, the property you’ll buy in Spain will be freehold. Occasionally, however, certain buildings may be sold under a leasehold contract. Any buyer must understand the implications of both types of property contracts and what they could mean for resale in the future.


Whichever type of property you buy, it’s essential to have a fully functional and easy-to-use bank account for making important transactions and property-related finances. Get in touch with the team at Bueno to open your Spanish bank account and get one step closer to owning property in Spain.