TITLE: What to Do If You Lose Property Documentation in Spain
CATEGORY: tax
SOURCE: google-doc 1QvA5WIhJQe4TI7g-0qoWAKcIXAQnxzkYhJArBdr9R48
---
What to Do If You Lose Property Documentation in Spain


Buying property in Spain involves lots of important documents and bureaucratic processes. Foreign buyers need to get a NIE (Número de Identificación de Extranjero) or apply for residency. Of course, once you find your dream Spanish property and the sale is complete, you’ll receive the title deeds and the property registry certificate too.


But what happens if you lose one of these important documents? Is it easy to get a copy?


The good news is that you can easily apply for most documents required for buying property in Spain. But you need to know the exact process to go through, so the issue can be resolved as quickly as possible – especially if you’re planning on selling.


What To Do If Each Spanish Property Document Is Lost
#1. NIE (Número de Identificación de Extranjero)
A NIE is an essential document used for all official activities in Spain. Whether you want to open a bank account, get a job, pay property taxes or even buy a car, you’re going to need a NIE. It’s therefore really important that you replace it as soon as possible once you realise it’s lost.


If your NIE was stolen, you’ll need to report it to the police (Policía Nacional) and file a ‘denuncia’. You can then go to your local foreigners’ office or national police station to request a duplicate. As is the case when you first apply for a NIE, you’ll need to complete the EX-15 form and the Tasa 790 Código 012 form (proof that you’ve paid your fee) before you go to your appointment.


You’ll need to apply for an appointment online (you can sometimes just turn up, but be prepared to wait in line) and pay the fee of around €10-€12.
#2. Residency Certificate
If you’re an EU citizen residing in Spain, then you’ll need a residency permit. Likewise, non-EU citizens, such as Brits after Brexit, still need a residency permit if they want to live in Spain or stay longer than 90 days in any 180-day period.


If you’ve lost your residency certificate or had it stolen, you’ll need to go to the police to report it (just like the NIE). Again, you’ll need to book an appointment at the national police station or foreigners' office and bring your passport, completed EX-18 form, proof of address/employment, and the Tasa 790 proof of payment.


You’ll usually be issued a duplicate residency certificate, unless it’s expired. In that case, you may need to reapply.


#3. Escritura de Compraventa (Deed of Sale)
This is a really important document which shows that the property has been transferred from one owner to another. It shows the legal purchase and ownership of the property.


If you’ve misplaced your Escritura de Compraventa, you can contact the notary who executed the original deed. If you’re unsure of the notary that executed your deed, you can contact the Land Registry (Registro de la Propiedad) where your property is registered and they’ll be able to supply you with the information.


Depending on your notary’s fees, you may have to pay between €20-€100 for a copy.


#4. Título de Propiedad (Title Deed)
Although this may seem the same as the Escritura de Compraventa, it’s actually a bit different. The Título de Propiedad is proof of you owning the property, and the Escritura de Compraventa is proof that the property has been exchanged between two owners. So, they’re very slightly different!


Although different, you go about getting a copy of them in the same way. You’ll need to contact the notary who executed the title deed, or you can also contact the Land Registry (providing the property was registered with the Land Registry correctly). A certified copy usually costs around €50, but can cost anywhere from €20-€100.


#5. Nota Simple
The Nota Simple is the property registry extract which summarises key details like the owner, any debts associated with the property and its legal status. It’s one of the main documents you should apply for before buying property in Spain as without it, you may have to pay the debts of the previous owner.


You can easily request the Nota Simple for your property online, and you need to pay a fee of €10. You can also request the missing Nota Simple in person by looking up your local Colegio de Registradores. You’ll need to bring your passport, NIE and the property details.


#6. Energy Performance Certificate (Certificado de Eficiencia Energética)
An Energy Performance Certificate (CEE) assesses a building’s energy efficiency and gives it a rating between A (most efficient) and G (least efficient). You need a CEE for many property-related situations, such as selling and renting. In fact, the CEE must be available before the property is listed, and a copy of it needs to be included in the notarial deed at the time it’s sold. Notaries may refuse to complete a sale without one.


To get a replacement CEE, simply contact the architect or technician who issued it or get a new one from a licensed assessor. The price will vary depending on the assessor, but they’re usually between €60-€150.


Lost Property Documentation in Spain – Final Thoughts
Losing documentation can be stressful, especially when you need it urgently (like when you’re about to sell). If possible, it’s best to always keep a digital version of the documentation, so you can refer to it as and when needed. It’s also worth updating all your contact information so that if you do need to request a new document, it arrives where it should.
Generally speaking, though, most property documentation in Spain is relatively easy to get again. Just be aware that you might need to pay for it and it’s best to do it as soon as you find out it’s missing!