TITLE: Understanding Property Market Seasons in Spain: When to Buy or Sell
CATEGORY: buying
SOURCE: google-doc 1qCJKmA1N-m5MFI5RlaIWD8ix5aJBXlDMdEn9VX-p6Rc
---
Understanding Property Market Seasons in Spain: When to Buy or Sell
People buy property in Spain for several different reasons. Great Spanish food, stunning coastlines, cultural cities and friendly people all play a role. But buying property in Spain is also a great investment, and one you want to maximise where possible.


When it comes to buying and selling in Spain, it’s essential to understand the property market and how the seasons in Spain affect it. Whether you’re considering selling (or buying) a chic apartment in Valencia or a villa on the Costa del Sol, it’s all about timing and understanding when would be best for you, your financial situation and the property.


In this article, we’re going to take you through the key things you need to think about when selling property in Spain so that you get the best price and conditions.


Overview of The Influences on The Property Market in Spain
The Spanish property market is very diverse and dynamic. Several factors influence when it’s a good or bad time to sell and buy property, and these can differ substantially from other European countries. When you understand the factors influencing the market, you’ll be able to navigate it better and buy or sell your dream home at the right time.


Spain’s Economic Stability
This is one of the biggest aspects that affects the property market in Spain. Of course, we all remember the financial crash of 2007 and how immensely that affected buying and selling property in Spain, but other factors also have an influence.


Economic Growth. When Spain’s economy is growing, there’s usually more demand for property. Buyers feel more financially secure and they tend to look to the future, either towards investments or family homes. The downside of this, however, is that when the economy slows down, interest in buying property does too.


Interest Rates. For those looking to buy property with a mortgage, interest rates play a big role. When rates are lower, more people are encouraged to borrow money and the demand for property increases. Higher rates, though, can discourage people from taking out a mortgage, which therefore slows down the property market.


Property Location
Spain is such a diverse country, from green fields in Asturias to desert plains in Andalusia, and this diversity has an impact on the property market too. Larger cities, such as Madrid, Barcelona, Valencia and Seville, are more consistent when it comes to buying and selling property.


Other coastal locations, such as the most popular towns to buy property on the Costa Blanca, tend to be more seasonal. Many of Spain's more touristy coastal spots are usually destinations that second home buyers are interested in, which changes buying behaviour.


Rural areas can be a little slower when it comes to the property market as there’s often less demand and they may lack the amenities of more popular places.


Seasons
Spain sees huge changes in many aspects of life and economy throughout the year. Tourists flock to the country during July and August, which can have a massive impact on property sales – especially in popular coastal areas. These numbers then fall heavily in the winter months.


Legal Regulations and Changes
Anyone living in Spain can tell you about the housing crisis the country is facing at the moment. In a bid to tackle the crisis for residents, the government is planning a number of regulations and restrictions for foreign buyers. For instance, the Supreme Court has recently upheld a ban on tourist apartments by residents’ associations. Many of these restrictions are making buying second homes in Spain less attractive to foreign investors, which can also impact the property market.


Local Events
Most tourists visit Spain during the summer months, but there are a couple of yearly events which make certain areas more popular at different times. For example, the Fallas Festival takes place in March in Valencia and there’s a noticeable increase in interest in property in the area around this time. The same can be said for the feria in Seville in May.


Getting to Know the Seasons of the Spanish Property Market
Whether you want to buy or sell property in Spain, it’s really important to know the best month (or months) to do it in. Here’s a breakdown so you can make the right choice.

Spring (March to May)
This is one of the best times to sell property in Spain. Generally speaking, foreign investors and Spaniards are looking towards the summer months, which makes this a good time to buy (and sell)! As the weather improves, more people book holidays and buyers tend to become more active before the summer season starts. Most people want to have exchanged well before the warm weather hits, so they can enjoy their new property in time.


You should also consider curbside appeal when it comes to selling your home. Properties often look best in spring, when gardens and balconies are in full bloom and the lighting is good.


Summer (June to August)
Demand is high for properties in Spain during the summer months. Lots of tourists go to their favourite holiday destinations and combine that time with looking for property to buy. There will also be increased visibility which means you’ll be more likely to sell sooner. Whilst demand can drive up prices, it may not always be advisable to sell during this period – especially if you can rent out your property during peak season.


Something else to consider, particularly if you want to buy or sell property in August, is that many estate agents, lawyers and banks may be on holiday. Several Spanish companies close for almost the entire month, which can delay the process.


Autumn (September to November)
Demand is also really high right after the summer season. Tourists have enjoyed the Spanish lifestyle and want a slice of the property pie for themselves. This could be a good time to sell property in touristy areas as you’ll probably rent it out less in the following months. Furthermore, you also need to consider the back-to-school factor. Many buyers with children will want to get everything finalized before the new school year begins.


When it comes to buying, however, there can be a lot of competition, which may drive up prices, especially in popular coastal towns.
Winter (December to February)
Things usually slow down in winter as everyone gears up to celebrate Christmas in Spain. The weather, although still much better than in other European countries, isn’t such a drive for foreign investors either. Not many are keen to make a significant financial decision with Christmas right around the corner.


Whilst arguably not the best time to sell your Spanish property, it can be an amazing time to buy. Sellers are more likely to be willing to negotiate and you might find a hidden gem! Property prices can also be lower than at other points during the year, meaning you could get more for your money.


When Should You Buy and Sell Your Property in Spain?
The most important factor to consider is what makes sense to you. If there’s no rush, you may want to consider selling your property in late summer/early autumn when there’s still plenty of demand and lots of competition. When it comes to buying, if you’re looking to find a bargain and don’t mind spending time searching for the perfect property, you could start the process in winter too.


Whenever you buy or sell property in Spain, it’s essential to have all your property finances in order. Opening a Bueno bank account can help make transferring money between accounts and currencies seamless. Our team of experts are happy to guide you through the process so you can buy and sell whenever suits you best and with the best financial conditions.