TITLE: How to maximise ROI When Renting to Seasonal Tourists in Spain
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1wjTAmQE2qzf59icn1fRIjVTgG-x9JWoG1jwSJlKcZZk
---
How to Maximise ROI When Renting to Seasonal Tourists in Spain
Spain is one of the most popular countries in Europe for buying holiday homes. Great investments, sunny weather and a diverse property landscape make it very appealing to all different kinds of buyers. Some people like to keep their second home as a private space for family, whereas others see it as an investment which they can rent out when they’re not using it.


So how can you make the best return on investment (ROI) when renting out your holiday home in Spain, and what restrictions should you be aware of? Here’s everything you need to know!


Renting Out Seasonal Property in Spain
If you’ve read the news in Spain recently, you’ll be aware of the housing crisis the country is facing and the various measures the government is considering to tackle it. One such measure is implementing a 100% tax on property purchases by non-EU buyers. Whilst this hasn’t come into effect yet, it will have an enormous impact when it comes to the property market in the country.


Another measure that is already widely spread is the restriction of tourist licences, a document you need in order to legally rent your property out in Spain in the short term. In many popular cities, it’s almost impossible to get a newly-issued tourist license, and in some cities, like Barcelona, they’re planning to revoke already-issued ones. This is with the hope of reducing rentals with tourist prices. Of course, this makes it very difficult, if not impossible, to get a good ROI renting to tourists if you buy in one of these areas.


That’s why it’s so important to check tourist licenses in your area before you buy. That way, you’ll be able to go ahead with your plan of renting out your property for short periods.


Understanding The Seasonal Tourist Market in Spain
If you want to get the best return on your property investment in Spain, it’s important to understand exactly when you should be renting your property out. In order to do that, you need to do some research on the area or any past rentals you’ve had.


Tourist demographic. Think about the types of people who are likely to rent your property and where they’re from. Is your property in a popular family holiday destination? Then the school holidays will be high season for you. Are you in a bustling spot liked by digital nomads? Then they may prefer to visit in low season. Understanding the different types of people who will rent out your property and their needs will help you to be prepared.
Different peak seasons in different places. Spain is a big and vastly different country, and this has an impact on how you rent your property. For instance, coastal towns, such as some of the best places to buy property on the Costa Blanca, are very seasonal. They’re much busier in the summer months than they are in winter.


Cities, however, tend to be much busier in the cooler months, and many people leave them when it gets hotter.


Optimising Property Appeal
Renting out property to tourists in Spain is very competitive. Therefore, one of the best ways to get a great ROI is by making your property stand out.


Interior design. Think about the kind of interior design tourists visiting Spain will like. This often means classic Mediterranean style, such as lighter colours, wood and plenty of open space. It’s also important that the design you go for is practical and can withstand people moving in and out regularly.


Unique amenities. Properties with unique amenities tend to get a better ROI than others. If, for example, you have digital nomads interested in renting your property, make sure you have a designated area that’s suitable for working. Likewise, providing suitable amenities and furniture for kids will help you to stand out from the crowd for families.


Effective Online Presence
Whether you’re listing your property through an agency or an online platform, it’s essential that you use high-quality images. For many renters, this will be the first impression they get of your property, and they’ll make an instant decision about whether the cost is worth it or not. Try to highlight the best features of your property, such as any outdoor areas, and even stage it with some food and drinks so people can imagine being there on holiday.


Something else that can really help your property’s online presence is positive reviews. Reviews can help to drive future bookings and improve visibility, which helps you get a better ROI.


Offer The Best Guest Experience
Extra details will make all the difference when it comes to renting out your property regularly. It’s essential to offer the basics, such as fast wifi and a great security system, but extras such as pool heating, experiences and local recommendations can go a long way too. Many tourists will appreciate environmentally friendly elements to the property, such as solar panels, and will be happy to pay more for greener alternatives.
Think Long-Term
When renting out property in Spain, it’s sometimes tempting to buy cheaper furniture, linens and crockery, especially if you’re not going to spend much time there yourself. But, buying cheaper products often means they break more easily or get damaged sooner. We’re not saying you need to buy designer furniture (and if you do, make sure this is reflected in the deposit) but cheap initially isn’t always better long term.


Also think about possible improvements you can do to your property. Sometimes homeowners associations bring communal improvements to the table, such as installing a lift in apartments, creating extra parking or renovating communal areas. Whilst this may cost money initially, it can add value to your property and help with renting it out.


It’s also really important to keep the property in excellent condition to maximise long-term profitability. Fix small issues before they become major ones and don’t forget to keep things looking aesthetically good, too.


Good Pricing Strategies
Offering dynamic pricing is a great way to adjust rental prices based on demand fluctuations. You want to find the perfect point and price your property depending on the season and demand. You could also think about offering discounts for extended stays or promotions for early bookings. This will help you to manage your renting year and could act as an incentive for people to rent time and again.


Ready to Find and Rent Out Your Perfect Spanish Property?
At Bueno, we’re experts in all things Spanish property. When you open a Bueno bank account, you’ll receive a Spanish IBAN which is ideal for setting up utilities and receiving rental payments. Our streamlined accounts allow you to be in control of your finances without any hidden costs or unexpected fees. Contact the team at Bueno for more information about setting up your Spanish bank account and how it can make renting out your Spanish property easy!