TITLE: A Month-by-Month Checklist for Non-Resident Property Owners in Spain
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1x0gft3VhwExZM1FUx8EW4eZ5PKrO31i6a2lMy2NdQ2k
---
A Month-by-Month Checklist for Non-Resident Property Owners in Spain
Owning a property in Spain as a non-resident is a brilliant way to enjoy the country as often as you like, whilst also earning extra income from renting it out. However, managing and renting a property from abroad also means staying on top of a range of administrative, financial and practical responsibilities throughout the year.


John: It's not like all foreign owners rent out their property, to me it feels like its a minority that rent out their property. At least for norwegian owners.


These are quite often different from those in other countries. Tasks are spread across the year, deadlines do not always align with calendar years, and requirements change depending on whether you rent out the property or if it’s vacant for a large portion of the year.


A month-by-month checklist helps you stay organised, avoid last-minute pressure and keep your property compliant and well-maintained.


But First, A Note on Local Variations
Deadlines and requirements differ between municipalities and autonomous communities. So, whilst this checklist is a great guide, it’s always important to follow information from your local ayuntamiento, tax office, tourism authority or community of owners.


You can treat this guide as a planning framework, rather than a fixed schedule.


January: Rental Income Tax and Annual Financial Review
If you declare rental income annually, you usually submit tax returns for the previous year in January. If you generate income through short, mid or long-term rentals, you’ll need to file a Rental Income tax form for the days it was rented out.


If you only rented out the property for part of the year, for example, over July and August, you’ll need to fill out the same form for those rented days and an Imputed Income tax return for the months that the property was empty or used by you.


It can get pretty complicated, especially if you’re renting out the property part-time. It’s best to speak to a trusted tax advisor so they can assist you. John: not complicated when Bueno manages the tax returns, definitely dont need a tax advisor to rent out the property…


January is also a good time to review the overall property finances for the previous year. Were your utilities, community fees, insurance and tax payments all paid correctly? Were there any unexpected charges you can avoid this year? Planning ahead is a great way to save money and time costs associated with managing a property in Spain!
February: NRA Registration and Renewal
The NRA (Número de Registro de Alquiler) was a mandatory and unique number that every short and mid-term rental property had to have to rent out legally. Currently the NRA is put on hold as it was declared illegal by the Spanish Supreme Court. This doesn't mean we heard the last of this, Spain rarely gives up on opportunities to charge extra fees and taxes.


I re-wrote this as we don't know for sure if the government will accept the ruling.
March: Post Winter Maintenance
After winter, many properties need a little TLC, especially if they’re located on the coast or have been empty for long periods.


March is perfect for post-winter checks. You should check plumbing, look for damp, test appliances and ensure heating and water systems are working properly. Dealing with small maintenance issues helps prevent more expensive repairs later on. If you have outdoor space, it’s also a good time to plant new things and spruce the area up for spring.


If you’re hoping to rent out your property for the following year, March is a great time to take new photos, adjust prices and refresh listings for the upcoming demand.


April: Quarterly Rental Tax and Utility Review
April is a busy time for Spanish property owners who declare rental income quarterly. Again, it’s best to speak with a tax advisor to determine how often you need to declare rental income.


April is also a good time to review all your utility contracts. Electricity, water and internet costs can change and many non-resident owners remain on outdated tariffs. Ringing around competitors often results in a much lower price for the rest of the year.


John: Rental tax is annually. And no need for a tax advisor. On the other hand, checking if the local rental license is still valid can become a subject.
May: Preparing for The High Summer Season
May is all about getting your property ready for the busy season and hot temperatures. Servicing and cleaning air conditioning units, prepping the pool and cleaning up the garden is key. If you have an outdoor cooking space, you should also check that it’s clean and fully functional.


It’s also worth confirming cleaning schedules, key handover arrangements and emergency contacts so everything runs smoothly during the busier months.


John: Again, a focus solely on renting out will leave out many owners. Maybe it should be re-named a document for those to rent out?


June: Insurance Review
June is a great time to review your property insurance. Some policies may be renewed annually, but early summer is the perfect moment to confirm that coverage reflects exactly how the property is currently used, especially if rental activity increases and you want to make sure you’re fully covered.


John: All traditional insurance companies only offer annual insurance products.But it's worth checking when it renews, in case you want to get a quote for someone else.
July: Community Fees and Seasonal Rentals
The first of the year’s community fees is often issued in July (of course, this depends on your property’s community and the location). They’re often done quarterly and many property owners decide to set up a direct debit so they don’t miss any important payments. You should also check the invoice carefully and, if your community is saving for a particular improvement, make sure you’re paying accordingly.


July is also one of the busiest months for coastal rentals in Spain. If you are renting out your property, you can expect an increase in guest communication. Responding quickly to questions about check-ins, amenities and local recommendations can significantly improve reviews and guest satisfaction.


If you’re not renting out your property, July is the perfect time to enjoy it too. You can explore the best beaches on the Costa Blanca, nearby towns and restaurants and experience the area like locals do.


John: community fees seem to be charged year around, some pay early in the year, some pay monthly, some quarterly. I am worried that this statement means extra support work for us, why haven't I been charged the community fees in July? We checked and it was charged in January…
August: Monitoring Rentals and Minimal Administration
August tends to be very quiet for administrative tasks – many Spanish offices slow down or close completely for holidays. If your property is rented, focus on monitoring bookings, income and any maintenance issues that arise.


It’s also a good time to think about rentals for autumn and winter, which are usually lower seasons. You might want to post your property on more platforms, adjust the rental price or think about enjoying it yourself (there are plenty of amazing things to do in Autumn on the Costa Blanca).


John: Again, make this a rental only document or we need to shift focus.


September: Post Summer Repairs and Income Review
After the busy summer period, September is ideal for post season maintenance. This can include small touch-up jobs, such as painting marks on the walls or larger tasks that may be more of an investment. You should also replace any items that have been heavily used and check household linens for stains or damage.


September is a good time to review rental income from the summer months and ensure all payments have been received and that platforms have taken the correct commission where necessary.


October: IBI Payment and Rubbish Tax
IBI (Impuesto sobre Bienes Inmuebles) payment deadlines differ all over Spain. Usually, on the Costa Blanca, all property owners need to pay their IBI around October. However, the exact date can differ and you must check with your Ayuntamiento to ensure you don’t miss any payments.


Rubbish tax is another important tax that non-resident property owners in Spain need to pay. The payment period often runs from late July to mid-October, but again, check with your local authorities to make sure.


John: Costa Blance rubbish tax is May and October. Costa del Sol, the IBI is often charged twice, spring and autumn. We are potentially creating extra work for the support team.


November: Banking Review
November is a good month to take a look at your banking setup and try to optimise it as much as possible. Even free banking in Spain often has hidden costs that could be costing you significantly at the end of the year. You need to check that your current bank has all the features you need and that they have a good currency exchange for transferring funds.


Opening a Buneo bank account is a great way to organise your yearly finances and set up direct debits for all essential payments so you don’t forget any. Our website and app are specifically designed for foreign property owners in Spain and our multilingual team can take you through all the steps of banking and property ownership in the country.


December: Imputed Income Tax for Non-Rented Properties
December is an important month for those who didn’t rent their property out during the year. If you partially rented your property or if it was solely for personal use, you’re required to pay imputed income tax using Modelo 210. If paid annually, the deadline is usually 31 December.


As with other types of tax for non-resident property owners, it’s good to talk to a professional about Imputed Income tax. They’ll be able to guide you so you don’t miss any deadlines that can result in fines.


December is an excellent month to make sure all your records are saved and ready for your tax obligations for the coming year. Of course, this month is also the perfect time to enjoy all the amazing Christmas celebrations happening across Spain.


Final Thoughts
Being a non-resident property owner often feels more complicated than owning property in the country where you live. Communication can be slower, response times longer, and unfamiliar bureaucratic processes can quickly start to feel overwhelming.


But, the good news is that with a monthly checklist, you can ensure you’re paying all the taxes you need to and making the most of your rental property. You can get ahead of some of the biggest tasks and make sure you have all the necessary documents in advance. You should always follow the deadlines set out by your local ayuntamiento, as tax dates differ from region to region and you don’t want to miss out on a payment!