TITLE: What is a Nota Simple and why is it crucial for buyers
CATEGORY: banking
SOURCE: google-doc 1YW8qTDtCekRG-t2xkx1eo7CiXnrX-XqFcKbZBbolP4I
---
What Is a Nota Simple and Why Is It Crucial for Buyers?
Getting a nota simple is one of the most important steps when it comes to buying property in Spain. It may seem insignificant, especially when thinking about exchanging deeds, getting a mortgage or even finding the property in the first place.


But a nota simple is a crucial document which contains important information about the property. It’s similar to the title deeds but is simple to understand – hence the name.


But when should you apply for a nota simple? How do you get one? And what should you do if the information on it isn’t what you’re expecting?

Here’s everything you need to know about this important document and why it could make all the difference to your property purchasing experience in Spain.


So, What Exactly Is a Nota Simple?
Apart from being one of the most important documents you need when buying property in Spain, the nota simple is also a legal document issued by the Land Registry (Registro de la Propiedad). The information issued on the document lets you know the specifics about the property you’re intending to buy (or the one you’re selling).


Common information included in a nota simple includes:
* The current owner
* Any debts associated with the property (both mortgages and unpaid taxes)
* The boundaries of the property
* Total square meters of land and any property on the land
* The classification of the land – rústico, urbano, urbanizable


Potential buyers can then compare the information they get from the owner/estate agent to the information on the nota simple. If, for example, there are serious debts associated with the property, the potential buyer then has the option to withdraw from the purchase.


Do You Need a Nota Simple When Getting A Mortgage in Spain?
Another important point which is often included in the nota simple, especially when the potential purchaser is applying for a mortgage in an urban area, is the castral value (or valor castral). The castral value is an estimate of the property’s capital value and, if it’s lower, it’s this amount that the bank will look at to give you a mortgage – not the amount you’re offering. So, if the castral value is registered as being 10k under your buying price, you’ll get a mortgage for 10k less. So, the nota simple is really important and something you should get before signing the arras contract.


Requesting a Nota Simple
There are two ways to request a nota simple – either online or in person at the Colegio de Registradores de la Propiedad. In person is cheaper, and you’ll have to pay a little less than €4 whereas online you’ll need to pay around €10.


If you want to go in person, look up your local Colegio de Registradores and bring with you your ID card/passport, NIE document and the property details. If you want to do it online, head to the Registradores website to find the relevant one for your property. Click on the ‘registros’ tab followed by ‘registro de la propiedad’ and then ‘solicitar nota simple’. You’ll then need to enter the property’s identification information (IDUFIR) which you can get from the seller or your estate agent may already have the information.


Simply enter your email and pay the fee and you should have the nota simple that day!


Who Can Request a Nota Simple?
Actually, anyone who has a general interest in buying the property can request a nota simple. In some cases, a friend or family member can even request it on behalf of the buyer if they have all the relevant information. The registrar will decide upon the application whether it’s a legitimate interest or not, and issue the document accordingly.


What Happens if You Think The Nota Simple Is Inaccurate?
Once you receive the nota simple, you might find an inaccuracy or discrepancy. They should be updated regularly but renovations or improvements may have been made to the property since the nota simple was made but these really still need to be recorded. If you’re unsure about the nota simple you receive or you find there are debts associated with the property, talk to a property lawyer. They’ll be able to advise on the best steps forward to protect your investment.


Are You In The Process of Buying Property in Spain?
Buying property in Spain can be confusing, especially with the different processes and documents involved. The team at Bueno are experts in property banking in Spain. With a Bueno account, you can have access to your Spanish funds and can easily transfer money from other accounts and currencies. Our local team understands how difficult buying property is in Spain and can help you at every step of the process – including with managing your property finances long after the close of sale. Get in touch with the team at Bueno to open your easy and secure Spanish bank account today!