TITLE: Preventing Pest Infestations in Spanish Holiday Homes
CATEGORY: utilities
SOURCE: google-doc 1WxlwED_eJ9LEdG2n0-63g-RomaUTaZOY4nBJTokaVdM
---
Preventing Pest Infestations in Spanish Holiday Homes
Spain is one of the most popular countries in Europe for non-nationals to buy property. Countless days of sunshine, a sociable lifestyle and great healthcare mean it’s the perfect place to bring up a family or retire too. But there are some significant differences between Spain and other parts of the world, including the UK, Germany and Norway. One of the biggest ones is pest infestations.


Warmer weather and a different climate mean that homes attract all kinds of small animals and critters – most of which you’d prefer were outside. And preferably far away.


So what kind of pest infections can you expect in Spain? What are the signs you’ve got a problem? And, most importantly, what can you do to get rid of an infestation?


Here’s everything you need to know about keeping your Spanish property pest-free.


Types of Pest Infestations You Can Expect in Spain
Some of the pests you can expect to be buzzing around your window in Spain are the same as in other countries, especially in summer. But there are a few others you should keep your eye out for too.


Flies. Flies, or moscas as they’re called in Spanish, can be a real nuisance during the warmer months.
Mosquitos. Of course, we’re all aware of the annoying sound of a mosquito – especially as you’re just about to fall asleep. Unfortunately, however, mosquitoes are very common in Spain, especially in humid areas or where there’s a lot of vegetation.
Cockroaches. Yep, probably the worst of them, especially when you find out that some types of cockroaches can fly in Spain.
Ants. These are another really annoying pest in Spain, especially in more rural areas such as interior villages on the Costa Blanca.
Fruit Flies. These pesky flies love hot and humid conditions – like well-watered pot plants or wonderfully ripe, Spanish fruit lying around.
Rats. Again, not one you really want to think about, but rats can be a real problem, especially in rural settings or homes with roofs or gardens that they can hide in.
Pantry Moths. Not only does your home become full of moths flying in every direction, but you also end up having to throw away almost all of your dry food store.


Signs Your Spanish Property Has a Pest Problem
There are a couple of clear signs to look for if you have a pest problem. Most of them are pretty obvious and the earlier you notice them, the earlier you can address the issue.


* The actual pest. That might sound a little obvious, but the first time you see a cockroach scuttle across the floorboards, it could be a sign that more are lurking nearby.
* Signs they’ve been there. This can include knaw marks, droppings, dead plants or damaged fabrics and furniture.
* Odd smells. An unaccounted for smell in your home could be a sign of a pest infestation.
* Pets behaving oddly. Dogs and cats are really responsive to their environments, especially when they change. If they start acting oddly, or start spending more time in certain areas of the home, it’s best to investigate why.
* Strange noises. From hissing coming from behind your cupboards (cockroaches) to scuttling in your roof (rats or mice), most pests make some kind of noise which you should be aware of.


How to Prevent Pest Infestations in Spanish Property
It’s always better to prevent a pest infestation rather than deal with one when it’s too late. The good news is that there are several things you can do to prevent pests getting into your home.


Put food away. This is arguably the most important thing to do in Spain if you want to reduce the likelihood of flies, fruit flies, cockroaches and other pests from entering your home.


Take out the bins regularly. One thing you’ll have noticed if you’ve bought property in Spain is that the street bins get emptied often – and there’s a reason for that. The Spanish sun just makes everything go off quicker, which pests love. So, make sure you empty your home bins often so they’re not attracted to your property.


Don’t leave dry food around over summer. Lots of people buy property in Spain with the thought of using it as a holiday home. That means that the property may stand empty for long periods of the year. Pests, such as pantry moths and cockroaches, love when they have free reign for long periods. Empty your cupboards of all dry foods, such as flour, pasta, grains, tea etc, before leaving to go back home.


Install screendoors and window nets. This is a must in Spain, especially if you want to spend time outdoors or sleep with the window open. Window nets are small frames that fit on the outside of your window, kind of like a mesh, that stop flies and mosquitoes from getting inside. Screendoors are also really useful, or, you could go old school and install a bead door – plenty of people still swear they work!


Block holes, cracks and plugs. Cracks at the back of your cupboard are perfect for letting critters in, especially if there’s food in there for them too. From time to time, clean out your cupboards and fix any holes or cracks. It’s also a good idea to put your plug in your drain overnight and pour boiling water down your plugs regularly. Cockroaches don’t mind entering your home via pipes!
What Should You Do if You Have a Pest Infestation?
There are plenty of things you can do yourself to deal with small infestations. These include buying insect traps such as electric fly swats or sticky paper. You could also try a more natural approach and use insect repelling plants such as basil, mint, lavender and lemongrass. Bay leaves work really well for repelling moths and cockroaches too, so you could always put a few of them at the back of your cupboards.


Insecticides are another popular choice and they’re readily available in Spain. You can buy insect sprays in most supermarkets and they work well against cockroaches and flies. Of course, if mice and rats are your problem, you may have to take more drastic measures.


Pest control companies are the most effective at getting rid of vermin or serious infestations. They’re widely available all over Spain and many are conscious about the stigma surrounding pest control, so have unmarked vans and are discreet in their work.




When dealing with pest infestations in Spain, it’s important to remember that prevention is always better than treatment. The differences in climate mean that pests are more abundant, and they love food and rubbish. Try to keep your house as clean as possible and always put away food or protect it with a fly net. If you’re thinking about renting out your property in Spain, it’s worth mentioning the risks to the tenants, so you don’t return to any nasty surprises!