TITLE: Preventative Maintenance Tips to Avoid Major Repairs
CATEGORY: utilities
SOURCE: google-doc 1lRUS-xFQCcXtROX1oILTHNi67n6__vUPtNrLx-x-4II
---
Preventative Maintenance Tips to Avoid Major Repairs in Spanish Homes
Taking all the steps to buy property in Spain is an exciting and occasionally stressful process. You have to decide on which part of the beautiful country you want to spend more time in and go through a lot of bureaucratic work. The good news is that there’s nothing like the feeling of being handed the keys to your brand-new Spanish property. The (slightly) bad news is that you need to maintain it to get the most out of your investment.


Whether you intend to rent out your new home, live in it or keep it as a holiday home for friends and family, doing regular little repairs can save you time and money down the line.


Here’s everything that Spanish property owners need to think about to avoid major repairs.


Understanding the Spanish Property Environment
There are certain things that property owners in Spain need to think about when it comes to maintenance, which aren’t an issue in other countries.


Of course, the first is climate.


Sun exposure and UV rays can have a big impact on properties, especially roofs and outer walls. Likewise, coastal properties that are exposed to high humidity might have to deal with mould, wood rot and corrosion.


Location is also really important. You might not always think so, but some parts of Spain can get very cold, usually in interior villages. Snow, ice, and rain can all damage property (especially when combined with very hot summers and drastic changes in temperature).


Sea air, although beautiful to breathe, can be a nightmare for properties. Salt can get into metal fixtures and will need to be replaced or maintained regularly. Understanding these different factors helps homeowners anticipate and prevent common issues before they become major problems.


Things to Keep an Eye on When It Comes to Spanish Property Maintenance
1. Roof and Gutters
Roofs are so often overlooked in Spanish properties. Keeping on top of any cracks or holes will reduce the likelihood of you needing to replace large areas of the roof. This is especially true if you use materials such as terracotta, which can become brittle with sun exposure.


Furthermore, regularly clearing out gutters can prevent water damage and leaks, which could cause serious structural problems in the future.


2. Pool Area
A lot of us dream about having a pool in our Spanish property. But, anyone who has ever seen an unloved pool will know how important it is to keep it maintained. Make sure the pool is regularly cleaned (even if you’re not there), the water is correctly treated, and the filtration system is working as it should be.


Not only is this essential to stop your pool from going green and slimy, but it’s also important for health and safety. Untreated pools can quickly become full of bacteria and fungi. If it reaches this level, you’ll need to have the pool drained and deep-cleaned, which can be very expensive.


3. Exterior Walls and Paintwork
Keeping on top of paint work can hugely increase the time between major repainting. Not only does it help to keep your property looking clean and cared for (which is especially important if you rent it out), but it also helps to protect the plaster and brickwork underneath from water infiltration.


It’s a good idea to paint your exterior walls with UV-resistant paint, which can last longer and won’t crack.


4. Garden
With all the wonderful sunshine Spain gets, gardens and plants on patios grow quickly. If you haven’t visited your property for a while and no one has been tending the garden, don’t be surprised to find it overgrown on your return!


Maintaining your garden, which includes mowing the lawn, trimming trees and hedges, and watering plants, helps to keep your property looking attractive, which adds to its value. There are also some common pest problems in Spain – many of which would love an overgrown garden to hide in!


5. Security Systems
At Buneo, one of the key Spanish property solutions we offer is a home alarm system with Sector Alarm. To ensure your alarm is working to its full potential, it needs to be checked regularly, which Sector Alarm’s engineers will do. Having a full-package alarm system is essential for all types of properties, especially those that are left unoccupied for periods of time and are vulnerable to squatters.


6. Floors
The Spanish use of natural materials, such as ceramics and stone, is one of the reasons so many foreigners love Spanish properties. But these materials need to be cleaned regularly, to keep them looking their best. You should clean tiles and stone floors often and use appropriate cleaning materials to prevent the buildup of dirt.


This is particularly important when renting out short-term, as different people coming and going can easily lead to natural materials losing their shine (and value).


A good investment for rental properties is hiring an efficient cleaning company. Deep cleaning properties in between rentals can keep everything looking new and prevent dirt from causing larger issues down the line.


7. Plumbing and Water Systems
If you’re buying property in Valencia, the Costa Blanca or the Costa del Sol, then you may want to install a water softener. These areas are known for their hard water, which can cause limescale buildup that can affect appliances and pipes. Regularly treating appliances, such as kettles, can help prolong their life dramatically.


It’s also really important to check for leaks in internal plumbing and outdoor irrigation systems so you reduce the likelihood of water damage.


8. Windows and Doors
In coastal areas where it’s hot and humid, it’s really important to check windows and door frames for rot or warping. You’ll also need to replace seals as and when necessary to maintain the property’s energy efficiency all year long. Older Spanish buildings are unlikely to have double glazing, so you might even want to consider upgrading to help insulate the house better.






Seasonal Maintenance Tips to Avoid Major Repairs
Different maintenance jobs need doing at different points of the year. In Spring, for example, you’ll need to clean gutters and pipes (removing fallen leaves and winter sludge) in preparation for any April showers. It’s also a good idea to check exterior paint and façades for signs of wear or moisture damage from the cooler and wetter months. You can repaint or reseal any areas as needed. Spring is also a good time to check and clean your air conditioner to make sure it’s fully functional for summer.


Summer is the best time to check pipes and water systems, especially those outdoors, which plants rely on.


But most of the household maintenance can be done in Autumn. Check security alarms before you leave for longer periods, and inspect the roof and gutters for signs of sun damage and to clean them before the heavier rain. This is also a good time to have your boiler serviced to make sure it’s efficient for winter.


Maintaining Your Spanish Property – Final Thoughts
It’s really important to do little jobs around your Spanish property to keep it in ideal shape for as long as possible. Some more significant repairs may be inevitable, but taking care of your property and understanding how the Spanish climate and different locations in Spain can affect your home will help you minimise major repairs further down the line.


Several companies help with property maintenance across Spain, especially for foreigners who aren’t residents. Opening a Spanish bank account with Bueno is an easy way to keep on top of all your property finances and easily and quickly pay maintenance companies for their services. Contact the multi-lingual team at Bueno to see how we can help make your property finances run more smoothly, so you can concentrate on enjoying your Spanish property.