TITLE: Retirement in Spain: Urban Living vs. Small Towns
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1OpwTS1XkeaVubJCyvH8yEcfmuveoKEIRG7H5bTGwZHY
---
Retirement in Spain: Urban Living vs. Small Towns


Spain is one of the most popular countries in Europe that people retire to. Lots of sunny days, great expat communities, amazing food and flights all over Europe… What's not to like? But, with over 500,000㎢ of land to choose from, deciding where to live in Spain has its challenges.


As experts in all things Spanish property (and Spain in general), we’ve got lots of useful pieces of advice for those looking to relocate to the country. In this article, we’re going to share with you our top tips for discovering and moving to Spain so you can decide whether urban living or an idyllic town is the best choice for you.


But First, Why Spain?
OK, apart from the sunny days, there are lots of reasons why people choose to move to Spain. The landscape is really diverse, meaning you’re sure to find the perfect place for you to stay. From metropolitan cities like Madrid to smaller inland villages on the Costa Blanca, you can find everything you’re looking for.


The health system and insurance in Spain are also excellent, which is particularly attractive to retirees leaving their home country. It’s easy to get a GP and hospitals have state-of-the-art equipment.


The Spanish culture is also a big lure for those thinking about moving there. Long lunches, great food and friendly people are hard to resist. Spaniards like to spend a lot of time outdoors, enjoying sports, heading to the beach and spending time with friends and family. All that greatly contributes to brilliant living standards in Spain – and a long life expectancy.


Think About Your Criteria
Before deciding on urban living or a small town, it’s important to think about your specific criteria. Once you’ve done that, you’ll be able to narrow down your choices to find the perfect option. Here are some criteria points to think about.


Weather. Most of us think of Spain as a hot and sunny country – and it certainly can be. But, because it’s also a really big country, the weather can change quite dramatically. In summer, most of the coast can get very hot but stays pretty mild during winter. Inland villages, especially in more hilly or mountainous areas can get very cold in winter and it may even snow!


If you don’t like very hot weather, it’s probably not a good idea to move to Seville or Cordoba as they can easily reach 40°C in summer.


Furthermore, regions such as Asturias are known for their rainfall. So if, for example, you’re coming from the UK looking for a bit more sun, you might want to move further south.


Language. Of course, it’s always good to learn some Spanish before moving to the country. However, there are multiple languages spoken in Spain and if you live in a more remote area, you’ll probably need to learn that language too. Older people in small villages in Catalonia or the Basque country will likely exclusively speak Catalan and Basque.


Cost of Living. A very important factor to consider for retirees is the cost of living somewhere. Generally, villages in Spain are cheaper to live in than large cities but you’ll probably need a car to get around.


Some of the most expensive places to live are Madrid, Barcelona, Malaga, San Sebastian and Zaragoza.


Airport Location. If you’re moving to Spain from another European country, you’ll likely want to head back sometimes or have friends and family visit. Having an airport nearby gives you the freedom to travel too. Most of the major cities in Spain, such as Madrid, Seville, Valencia and Barcelona, have international airports. If you’re thinking of buying property in one of the most popular places on the Costa Blanca, then Valencia and Alicante airports are both close by.


Tourism. Tourism plays a huge role in Spain’s economy. It’s one of the most popular holiday destinations in Europe but, for many places, that’s only the case during the summer months. During winter, smaller towns can really die down, meaning shops and restaurants close and there’s less to do. If that’s an issue for you, consider buying property somewhere in Spain that’s not so seasonal.


Natural Surroundings. How far away from the beach do you want to be? What about mountains to go hiking or skiing in? If you choose to live in a small village, do you want to have a larger city close by? These are all really important questions to think about when choosing the perfect place.


Benefits of Living in a City as a Retiree in Spain
If, after going through those criteria points, you think moving to a city is perfect for you, then loads of benefits come with that.


Well Connected. Almost all the major cities have airports. Lots also have ports and good public transport and are easily accessible by car.


More Property Choice. There are generally more property options in cities in Spain for different budgets. There might also, however, be more competition.


Amenities. If you want to move to Spain for restaurants, cafes, shops and bars, you’ll find more of them in cities. You’re also closer to hospitals and cultural attractions such as museums and cinemas.


Not So Seasonal. More people come to Spain during the summer months but there will be less of an impact if you live in a city.
Negatives of Living in a City as a Retiree in Spain
Less of a Community. It can be difficult to have a sense of community in a city, especially if you’re new.


Property Is More Expensive. Generally speaking, property in cities is more expensive (that’s not always the case) but you’ll likely have a smaller property than in a village.


Need to Travel to Nature. You’ll probably have to get in a car to enjoy some countryside. Many cities, however, such as Valencia, have a beach which can be a good compromise.


Benefits of Living in a Small Town as a Retiree in Spain
Potentially More for Your Money. Living in a more rural area means you’ll be able to buy a bigger Spanish property – possibly with a garden and even a pool!


Neighbourly community. It’s only natural that you’ll get to meet your neighbours and those around you in a smaller town. It might help you to settle in quicker.


Closer to Nature. Spain’s landscape is incredible and if you move to a town you might have some of it right on your doorstep!


Negatives of Living in a Small Town as a Retiree in Spain
Travel for Medical Needs. There might be a doctor in the town but you’ll probably have to travel to a larger city for more in-depth medical services.


Could Be Very Seasonal. If you move to a town on the coast or one of the islands, it could be very busy in summer and very empty in winter.


You’ll Need a Vehicle. If you move to a remote town in Spain, there probably won’t be any public transport (or very limited) and you’ll need to drive to go shopping or to a larger town.
So, Is It Better to Live in a City or a Small Town as a Retiree in Spain?
That really depends on you, your needs and your criteria for moving to Spain. There are so many benefits to both that it falls to personal preference. A good compromise could be moving to a larger town that still has a community feel but that’s also closer to a big city for hospitals and travel options.


Wherever you buy property in Spain, a Bueno account can help you with all your property banking needs, including international transfers, property insurance and setting up utilities. Contact our team for bespoke advice in your chosen language for buying property in Spain.