TITLE: Solar energy systems in Spain: costs and real savings
CATEGORY: utilities
SOURCE: google-doc 10_pVzmRxaRFp7r1-Co_3zdBBHvFXCtMLbZoJfO2qSIg
---
Solar energy systems in Spain: The costs of installation and the real savings to your bills
One of the many reasons foreigners decide to buy property in Spain is because of the country’s amazing weather. But over 300 days of sun aren’t just good for topping up your tan and spending long evenings eating outdoors. They also give you a great opportunity to do your part for the environment and save money on your electricity bills as you do so.


But what is the reality of installing solar panels in Spain? What are the regulations and benefits?


At Bueno, we’ve partnered with Energy Nordic to bring our customers green energy that’s well-priced and that can be invoiced in seven languages. In this article, we’re going to have an in-depth look into solar panels and solar energy in Spain, and the benefits and savings it could potentially bring to your home or company.


What exactly is solar energy?
We’re not going to go into the exact science of solar energy but, basically, light radiation from the sun is absorbed by cells in a solar panel which then generates power, known as the photovoltaic effect.


The energy created by these cells is direct electrical current (DC) which is converted into alternative current (AC) which can be used by appliances in the home or distributed back to the grid.


As you can imagine with all that sun, Spain is one of the leaders when it comes to solar energy and installation is becoming ever more popular across the country.


What’s the sun tax in Spain?
Only a couple of years ago, it was very uncommon to see solar panels in Spain. For such a sunny country, it always seemed strange that people weren’t making the most of all those hours of sunshine, especially when they were in more northern European countries. But that’s because of the sun tax, which was introduced in 2015. This made it almost impossible to affordably install solar panels and reap the rewards.


Thankfully, however, the sun tax was abolished in 2019 and, since then, there has been a huge increase in people in Spain installing solar panels on their properties.


The benefits of solar power in Spain
When it comes to solar energy in Spain, there’s a lot of misinformation out there, claiming that you’ll be paying €0 for your electricity bills almost from day one. Whilst it’s unlikely your bill-paying days will be over, there are huge benefits to installing solar panels.


Cost-effective solution
Most homes see a decrease of 30-80% in their electricity bills. Over the years, this quickly adds up to the cost of installing the panels in the first place. There are also some tariffs available that give you the opportunity to ‘sell back’ any surplus energy you may have.


Better for the planet
Of course, one of the most popular reasons for installing solar panels is because the energy produced is completely renewable and much better for the planet. You no longer need to be as reliant on fossil fuels and there’s no chance of anyone monopolising solar power. Unlike fossil fuels, solar power isn’t going to run out either, so you know it’s a long-term and environmentally friendly alternative.


Power backup in case of energy Outage
Although not particularly common, Spain does still face the occasional energy outage – especially in more remote areas. Solar panels on your roof will continue to produce electricity during power outages as long as the sun is shining. You’ll only be able to use the energy, however, if you also have a solar battery. If you’re tied to the grid, your solar system will switch off for safety reasons and you won’t have any electricity during the outage.


Things to think about when installing solar panels in Spain
Whilst there aren’t any negatives to installing solar panels, there are definitely a couple of things you need to consider before.


High initial investment
How much your solar panels will cost you to install depends on the size of your property and how much electricity you use. Usually, installing solar panels costs between €6,000 and €10,000 but the type of solar panel, manufacturer and installation costs can all have an impact too.
You need it to be sunny
That might sound like an obvious one, but it’s definitely something you need to think about. Even though Spain is one of the sunniest countries in Europe, it’s not sunny every day – even on the Costa Blanca. So you won’t produce much electricity on those days. Furthermore, while savings can be impressive in summer, they will be much less in winter.


Your property might not be suitable
Not all properties can have solar panels, although as technology improves, more and more can. Before you have your solar panels installed by a registered company, they’ll need to assess your property and the quality of your roof. You’ll also need to think about position and orientation as south-facing solar panels produce more electricity than others.


Waiting times
Since the sun tax was scrapped, solar energy has become increasingly popular in Spain. In fact, in some areas, demand is so high that waiting times to have your solar panels installed may be months and you may be asked to pay upfront. Check with an installation company before committing to see what their estimated waiting times and conditions are.


Why choose Bueno and Energy Nordic?
We partnered with Energy Nordic to offer our customers green energy at a fair price and with excellent customer service. They can install solar panels across Spain and advise on your best options when it comes to generating clean energy in your home. As is in line with Bueno, their prices are fair and transparent, with no hidden costs and you’ll be aware of what you need to pay and your possible savings from the beginning. They may suggest a flex tariff to get the best energy for the best price.


Interested in installing solar systems in Spain?
If you’d like to know more about installing solar panels and using green energy in your home, get in touch with the team at Bueno. We’ll be happy to talk you through your options so you can experience the benefits of solar energy for yourself. So, whether you want to reduce your monthly bills or contribute to a greener future, solar energy is the way forward.