TITLE: How Do Spaniards Celebrate Christmas? A Complete Guide for Expats
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1ngud-R1KfBpRxA7zgieI9g7M-3FWbFikPoDxLKUcNDY
---
How Do Spaniards Celebrate Christmas? A Complete Guide for Expats


If you’ve recently bought property in Spain and are thinking about spending Christmas in the country, there are a couple of things you need to know. Of course, Spain is a wonderful place to enjoy family time. There’s amazing food, great weather and towns and cities come alive with beautiful twinkling lights and markets.


But, Christmas is a little different in Spain.


For a start, many Spaniards don’t celebrate Santa Claus and he certainly doesn’t bring presents down the chimney for kids to open on Christmas Day. There’s not much turkey eaten around Christmas time in Spain either.


There are, however, lots of amazing traditions, special celebrations and street parades which are fantastic to see.


What You Need to Know if You’re in Spain for Christmas
#1. Different Regions Celebrate Differently
Anyone who’s been on the property search in Spain knows how diverse the country is. You can find beachside apartments on the Costa Blanca, rural property in Andalusia and new-builds in some of the most desirable cities. So, it’s only normal for different areas to celebrate such an important holiday differently.


In Catalonia, for example, they have the Tió de Nadal. This is a log that gets put to sleep at the beginning of December and slowly fed with sweets, chocolate and presents. On Christmas Eve, kids hit the log with sticks and all the goodies inside spill out for them! You’ll find Tió de Nadals in Christmas markets all over Spain, especially in Catalonia.


#2. It’s Not All About Christmas Day
In the UK, Christmas Day is the big event. It’s when we open presents, have family round and eat a lot. Like many other European countries, however, Spain celebrates Christmas on Christmas Eve. Families get together and, if they exchange presents at Christmas, it’s done on the 24th. There’s a big meal and it runs late into the night. Christmas Day is usually celebrated with another lunch but isn’t as big as Christmas Eve.


For many Spaniards, however, the big gift-giving day is the 6th of January – Three Kings Day. It’s a national holiday and there are wonderful parades in every town and city. In some places, like some of the most popular towns to buy property on the Costa Blanca, the kings even arrive by boat before they parade through the streets, throwing gifts and sweets to kids!


#3. There’s No Set Meal
Unlike in the UK, where almost everyone has turkey, roast potatoes and stuffing, there’s no one meal that everyone eats in Spain. On Christmas Eve, it’s common for Spaniards to prepare a range of different dishes, including a variety of tapas, meat, fish, seafood, cured meats and cheeses. You can guarantee the food in Spain will be amazing at Christmas!


For dessert, people often eat Turrón, a kind of nougat made from almonds and honey. It comes in all different shapes and sizes and originates in Jijona, a town on the Costa Blanca.


On Christmas day, different families eat different meals. Some may have paella, whilst others enjoy roasted meats, soups or fish.


The Three Kings Day is another important day for food in Spain. On this day, everyone eats Roscón de Reyes, a circular cake filled with whipped cream and covered in candied fruit. There’s a bean and a small king figure in every Roscón. If your slice has the bean, it means you need to buy the cake the next year and if you get the king, you’ll have a year’s worth of luck!


#4. Bingo Is Big
Spaniards love bingo at Christmas. El Gordo, as the Christmas bingo is called, happens every year on the 22nd of December. It’s a little different from other bingos. In fact, Spaniards pay hundreds of euros for tickets and there’s a higher chance that you might win. Rather than choosing numbers, you buy either a single ticket (for 20 Euros) or a line of 10 tickets (it’s common for people to buy ten and swap them with or give them to relatives and friends). Schoolchildren then read out the numbers on the television.


#5. Grapes Are Important on New Year’s Eve
Just like New Year's Eve on the Costa Blanca, people all over Spain eat 12 grapes in the 12 chimes before NYE to bring luck and good fortune for the coming year. Whether at a party, street party or dinner, Spaniards always have their grapes ready for the countdown!


#6. Beléns Are Very Impressive
Beléns are nativity scenes in Spain and they’re a big part of Christmas in the country. They’re more than just Jesus in a manager in a stable, they can be entire villages with real trees and water. There are lots of amazing ones to see all over the country, including in the best Christmas markets on the Costa del Sol.




Christmas in Spain – Final Thoughts
Whether you’ve just bought your property and it will be your first Christmas in Spain or you're a seasoned pro at Navidad in the country, you’re sure to have an amazing time. The food is great and there are loads of wonderful traditions you can be part of. Plus, the weather is bound to be better than in other parts of Europe!