TITLE: The Top 8 Places to Buy Property on The Costa Blanca
CATEGORY: buying
SOURCE: google-doc 1Nfx_oM494auL0HwRO2AY5gz1_qWWDOsi
---
The Top 8 Places to Buy Property on The Costa Blanca


The Costa Blanca is over 200km of beautiful coastline on Spain’s eastern tip. With Alicante in the middle, the Costa Blanca is easy to get to thanks to daily flights from all over Europe. For decades, this stunning area of Spain has been popular amongst national and international property buyers.


Property on the Costa Blanca is very varied and there’s something for all budgets – from cheaper townhouses to sprawling villas with swimming pools and views across the Mediterranean. But with 200km to choose from, where’s the best place to buy property on the Costa Blanca?


Here are our top 8 places to buy property in this stunning region of Spain.


But First, Why The Costa Blanca?
Not only is the Costa Blanca a top spot to retire to in Spain, but it also offers something for younger couples, families, and those with an active lifestyle. From busy beach towns to quieter hilly villages surrounded by vines, the Costa Blanca really does have something for everyone.


With 330 days of sun each year, this region of Spain is a great place to live or visit all year long. There’s a wonderful diet of fresh vegetables, fruits, and seafood and rice dishes are common throughout the area. There’s also a great sense of community in many places along the Costa Blanca, with foreigners and Spaniards living and working together happily.


It’s also home to some of the best beaches in Europe. There are plenty of family-friendly playas, as well as rocky coves and pebble beaches all the way along the coast.


So, whether you fancy spending your mornings wandering around a local farmer’s market, sitting in your garden overlooking vineyards and the sea in the distance, or swimming in some of the clearest water the peninsula has to offer, the Costa Blanca is an ideal place to invest in property.


The Top 8 Places to Buy Property on The Costa Blanca
The Costa Blanca runs from Dénia in the north to Pilar de la Horadada in the south. There’s a great mix of towns and villages as well as large cities such as Alicante. Here are 8 of the best places to consider when buying property there.
#1: Moraira
Moraira is a really popular place for holidaymakers and those looking to buy. This town beautifully blends traditional Costa Blanca architecture with modern touches, as well as perfect sandy beaches, incredible restaurants and a lively atmosphere.


You can find large villas right on the beach as well as modern apartments in the town centre. There are also several properties up in the hills, offering stunning views of the sea and surrounding area.


#2: Javea
Javea is the perfect place to buy a home on the Costa Blanca. The town is split up into three areas: the port, the beach and the old town, meaning there’s a huge variety of property on offer. Javea also has stunning beaches and coves to explore as well as restaurants, bars and plenty of cafes. It’s perfect for those with an active lifestyle and there are many sports and watersports groups in the town.


#3: Calpe
Calpe is one of the bigger towns on the Costa Blanca and a great place to move to or buy a holiday home. It has a large and beautiful beach, daily street markets and some of the best restaurants along the coast. Property in Calpe is very diverse and you can find cosy apartments in the centre of town, as well as larger villas on the outskirts.


#4: Torrevieja
Torrevieja is a beautiful town to the south of the Costa Blanca. Popular amongst retirees and families, this coastal town has pristine waters, sandy beaches and a lively port lined with restaurants. This old fishing village is a great base for exploring the local area, including the Torrevieja Nature Park which has two salt lakes and plenty of hiking trails.


#5: Dénia
Dénia is the northernmost town on the Costa Blanca and is on the other side of the Montgó mountain from Javea. This picturesque town has a busy marina with ferries leaving daily to the Balearic Islands. It’s overlooked by a ruined castle and has a strong community of expats. As you might imagine from a town on the beach, there are plenty of great seafood restaurants as well as shops and markets.


#6: Benissa
Benissa is close to some of the best beaches on the Costa Blanca. This idyllic town is steeped in historical architecture and is set slightly back from the coast, giving you spectacular views over the Mediterranean whichever way you look. Cobbled streets are lined with palm trees and there are loads of great spots for eating paella or enjoying a sunset drink.


#7: Altea
Altea is a popular and very beautiful town, famed for its winding streets, white buildings and beautiful plazas. It has a lively marina with fishing boats going in and out as well as charming walkways and independent shops. There’s lots of property on offer in Altea, including townhouses, apartments and larger villas on the outskirts.


#8: Xaló
For those wanting a quieter life, Xaló offers views of rolling vineyards, stone villas and dramatic mountains. About half an hour from the beach, this village is the perfect backdrop for a rural Spanish property and is one of the most famous wine-growing regions in the area. Although quieter, there are still plenty of great restaurants and cafés to enjoy and great property opportunities too.




Ready to Buy Property on The Costa Blanca?
The Costa Blanca is one of the most popular places to buy homes in Spain – and with good reason. This stunning area has plenty of properties to choose from with a good mix of styles and budgets. The Mediterranean lifestyle plus great weather and an international community make the towns that line the coast very desirable and a great investment!