TITLE: Typical Dishes from Spain: Everything You Need to Try
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1y-YaPjP5ASYuwK-sIrO5MIRZ1wunjl3Dh7l__DQrk1w
---
Typical Dishes from Spain: Everything You Need to Try
There are so many different reasons why people decide to buy property in Spain. Sun, diverse landscape, great beaches and, of course, the incredible food. The Mediterranean diet is famous around the world for its fresh ingredients, bold flavours and health benefits.


Most of us have heard of the iconic Spanish dishes such as paella and, whilst they’re amazing, this country has so much more to offer. From soups to sweet treats, you’ll never be bored of Spain’s diverse menu.


Top 17 Spanish Dishes to Try
#1. Paella
OK, so it might be the obvious one, but there’s a reason why it’s so popular. Paella is originally from the Valencian region of Spain and there are traditionally two types – meat and seafood. But not together, no matter what your supermarket back home tells you. Meat paella is made up of chicken, rabbit, artichokes, garrafó (large white beans) and green beans. Seafood paella has prawns, mussels, crayfish and squid.


Neither have red pepper or peas and, regardless of what Jaime Oliver might tell you, there’s definitely no chorizo or white wine.


Paella is almost always eaten at lunch and ordered per person and all the portions are brought to the table in a large paella pan. It’s full of the rich flavour of saffron and don’t think it’s burnt if there’s a layer of dark rice on the bottom. This is called socarrat and it’s the best part for many Spaniards.


#2. Tortilla de Patata
You can decide whether you add onion or not – it’s a great debate in Spain. Regardless, tortilla is a staple in many homes and tapas bars around the country. It’s made from eggs and potatoes and is often pretty gooey in the middle. It’s sometimes served on a piece of bread or just as a slice!


#3. Cocido
Cocido is a really popular Spanish dish that’s eaten in winter. Different people, restaurants and areas have different ways of doing it, but it’s usually a three-course affair. You start with a broth, followed by chickpeas and veggies and finish it off with meat and sausages. Cocido from Madrid is the most famous one and it’s the ideal winter warmer.


#4. Gazpacho
From the perfect winter dish to the perfect summer one. Gazpacho is a cold soup made from tomatoes, garlic, cucumber, green peppers and vinegar. It’s delicious and refreshing on a warm day.


You can also try salmorejo which is another cold tomato soup. Instead of using cucumber and green pepper, it has egg.


#5. Fideua
Fideua is a dish you’ll find in many of the restaurants on the best beaches on the Costa Blanca. It’s kind of like a paella but made from thin pasta rather than rice. Again, it’s eaten at lunch and served in a large paella pan and you’ll likely need to reserve it in advance.


#6. Patatas Bravas
Is this Spain’s most famous tapa? It’s certainly available in almost every bar – which would suggest so. Patatas bravas differ from region to region and bar to bar. They’re usually served with aioli and the spicy sauce is made from hot paprika. In some bars, the sauce is barely spicy (more like ketchup) and in others, it definitely has a kick!


#7. Pimientos de Padrón
Or maybe this is Spain’s most famous tapa? Pimientos de padrón are a popular choice all over the country and a great one for vegetarians. Traditionally, eating pimientos de padrón was a little like playing Russian roulette – there were always a couple of very spicy ones amongst the non-spicy peppers. Nowadays, however, they tend to all be non-spicy (but it’s best to check first)!


#8. Jamón Iberico
Jamón is eaten all over Spain in lots of different ways. Whether in a sandwich or freshly cut, it’s a favourite in many households. It’s eaten at most celebrations in the country, including Christmas, weddings and birthdays and it’s quite common to give a whole jamón as a gift. Arguably the best jamón (and also one of the most expensive) is jamón de bellota. The pigs are fed solely bellota which are acorns!


#9. Croquetas
Croquetas are one of the most versatile Spanish dishes and a favourite for many. They’re breaded and deep-fried balls of bechamel sauce that can have lots of different flavours, including jamón, mushrooms, prawns, cheese and chicken. In many homes, they’re made the day after a large meal to use up all the leftovers.


#10. Pulpo a la Gallega
For any octopus lovers, this is a must-try when in Spain. It’s originally from Galicia – a region of Spain that’s well-known for its seafood. Cooked octopus is finely cut and served with sliced potatoes, olive oil and smoked paprika. In some restaurants, you might see it served with mashed potato instead of sliced potato.


#11. Espetos
This is an amazing fish dish served on the beach in Malaga. Sardines are stacked and skewered together and cooked over an open fire to give them a charred, BBQ flavour. They’re sometimes served with a sauce and are best enjoyed when eaten with your hands!


#12. Pan con Tomate
It might not be the most exciting Spanish dish on the list but it’s an absolute classic. In some regions, especially to the north of Valencia, bread with grated tomato and aioli is served before meals. It’s also a common breakfast across the country, sometimes served with jamón or cheese.


#13. Pisto
Pisto is a light stew originating from the La Mancha region in central Spain. Unlike most of the Spanish dishes on this list, it’s vegetarian too! It’s made from bell peppers, courgettes, tomatoes, onions, and garlic and is a little like ratatouille. Pisto is usually served with crusty bread and sometimes with a fried egg on top.


#14. Queso Cabrales
Manchego is a well-known Spanish cheese but you should definitely try queso cabrales too. It’s a blue cheese from Asturias in northern Spain and, like most blue cheeses, is pretty strong. It’s a mixture of cow, goat and sheep’s milk and is matured in natural limestone caves.


#15. Albondigas
Albondigas are Spanish meatballs served in a rich tomato sauce and you usually eat them as a starter or tapa. Of course, they’re mopped up with crusty bread! Restaurants across Spain serve their own versions of albondigas which are prepared with pork, beef or veal.


#16. Turrón
You’ll find turrón all over Spain in the run-up to Christmas, especially in the Christmas markets on the Costa Blanca. It’s a delicious type of nougat made from honey and almonds and is available in lots of forms and flavours.


#17. Migas
Migas is a very traditional Spanish dish made from bread crumbs and torn stale bread. They’re slowly fried until creamy yet crunchy and are sometimes served with chorizo or other meats. Migas were once seen as peasant food but, nowadays, you can find them on fancy restaurant menus too.


Spanish Dishes – Everything You Need to Try
There are so many incredible dishes you need to try in Spain. Whether a tapa, main dish or dessert, there’s such variety and even a couple of options for vegetarians too! Some of them are usually ordered at a bar or restaurant but others can be made at home and enjoyed as part of a long, traditionally Spanish lunch!