TITLE: Guide to moving from the UK to Spain
CATEGORY: lifestyle
SOURCE: google-doc 1o9h55giJ0231kL0DrpxWJGLDjvfd7r15HYyN7Sv_vr4
---
Guide to Moving from The UK to Spain
Deciding to move to Spain is such an exciting step. More than 400,000 Britons have moved to the sunny county for its brilliant quality of life, good healthcare, warm temperatures and diverse scenery. But once you’ve made the decision, you can be left with the overwhelming thought of everything you need to set up before making the big move.


In this guide, we’re going to take you through the whole process of moving to Spain from the UK so that you can prepare yourself and rest assured knowing you have everything organised to start your life in a new country.


Moving from The UK to Spain Checklist
#1. Legal Considerations: Visas and Residency
Of course, one of the most important things to think about when moving to Spain is making sure you have all your legal documents in order. Something many Brits are worried about is moving to Spain after Brexit and the legal implications that this decision has had. The good news is that Brits can still move to Spain and buy property there – but they will have to pay higher taxes and fill out a bit more paperwork.


There are several visas available for people moving from the UK to Spain. Here are some of the most common ones:


* Visado de Trabajo y Residencia: This visa combines residency and work, allowing you to be employed once you’ve moved to the country.
* Visado de Estudios: This is a study visa which is valid for the duration of an educational or training course.
* Visado de Residencia. This is the type of visa you’ll need for family reunification or retirement.


You will also need to have a valid UK passport (not only to enter the country) but also for other important documents such as the TIE and NIE. The TIE is an identity card for foreigners which includes your NIE, name and address. The NIE is a unique number given to all foreigners wanting to conduct legal affairs in the country, such as buying property in Spain, opening a bank account or setting up utilities.


#2. Sort Your Finances Out
Sorting out a Spanish bank account is a priority for anyone moving to the country. In fact, you may even be able to do it before you arrive in the country. Having a Spanish bank account is essential as you may not be able to pay for important things, such as utilities or healthcare, without one.


One of the easiest ways to set up a Spanish bank account is with Bueno. On doing so, you’ll get a euro debit card and Spanish IBAN which you can use for payments in the country. It only takes a few minutes to set up, and you can access your funds online or via our app. We also offer some of the best currency exchange rates, making it ideal for Brits earning a pension or money in the UK.


#3. Organise Healthcare and Insurance
Spain has a well-established healthcare system, known for its high-quality service. UK nationals who are official residents of Spain may be able to qualify for Spain’s public healthcare system if they meet the necessary criteria.


Workers and Self-Employed: If you are employed or self-employed in Spain, your employer or you will pay into the Spanish social security system, which entitles you to access the public healthcare system.


Pensioners and Retirees: If you’re a pensioner considering moving to Spain, you’ll need to fill out an S1 form before you move. You can request this from the government. This allows you to access the Spanish public healthcare system and ensures that Spain will cover the healthcare costs as long as you are a registered resident.


Students: UK students will need to show proof of enrollment in order to access the Spanish social security system.




Of course, another option is private healthcare. Naturally, private healthcare is more expensive than the public alternative, but it does give you access to different facilities and shorter waiting times.


#4. Accommodation
If you’re thinking of moving to Spain, you may already have bought property in the country or know where you want to rent. Others might be waiting until they move to find their ideal home. Whichever way you choose to do it, it’s important to think about where in Spain you want to live.


Spain is a huge country with beautiful interior villages, cosmopolitan cities and bustling coastal towns. It’s good to think about the kind of life you want for yourself in the country and whether that involves quiet countryside, the best golf courses in Spain or a vibrant community.


#5. Learning the Language
You don’t need to speak Spanish fluently to move to Spain, but learning a few common words and basic phrases will go a long way. It will help you to meet neighbours, settle into your community and learn more about the country you’re choosing to call home! Whether you decide to live in a touristy or more rural part of Spain, it’s important to make the effort before you arrive.


But don’t worry if your Spanish isn’t fully up to scratch before you arrive. At Bueno, our experts speak several different languages, including English, so they can help you with important relocation steps, such as opening a Spanish bank account and setting up utilities.


#6. Learning to Navigate Daily Life in Spain
There are lots of differences between Spain and the UK (many of which may be the reasons you’re moving to the country!), but there are also some practical things you need to get used to. For example, in Spain, they drive on the right-hand side of the road – which can get a bit confusing. It might be worth having a couple of driving lessons to get used to things.


Likewise, you should familiarise yourself with how school systems work (if you’re moving with kids), as these can also differ from England. The more information you can know in advance, the better.


#7. Organise Moving Your Belongings
One of the most complicated things to manage when moving from the UK to Spain is what to do with your belongings. Should you bring them? Sell them? Or a mix of the two?


If you do decide to move your belongings with you, make sure you choose a trusted and accredited removal company with experience moving from the UK to Europe. This will help to ensure that everything arrives on time and in one piece!


If you plan on renting out your property in the UK whilst you move to Spain or don’t want to deal with the hassle of moving, then you’ll be happy to know that there are plenty of companies and places to buy new furniture in Spain – and often much cheaper than in the UK!


#8. Settle into Spanish Culture
Just like learning the language, familiarising yourself with the different aspects of Spanish culture can help you to integrate much quicker. It’s not all about having a siesta (although remembering that lots of businesses close at this time is always helpful) but respecting Spanish norms will help you to enjoy the country more.


Spaniards love to embrace a sociable and outdoor lifestyle, so you can expect lots of meals with friends and family or drinks before dinner. It’s worth looking in the community that you’re moving to to see if there are any groups or events that you could take part in which could help you to get to know the culture better and meet new people.


Ready to Move to Spain from The UK?
There’s so much to think about when moving from the UK to Spain. Some of it is really fun (like all the new Spanish dishes you’re going to try), and some of it might take a little more brainpower.


The good news is that the experienced team at Bueno can help you with many of the most important steps on this list. We understand the difficulties of moving to Spain, especially when it comes to buying property and property banking. That’s why we’ve created simple property banking in Spain that gives you the best rates and is easy to use from wherever you are! Contact the team at Bueno to see how a Bueno bank account can make all the difference when you move to Spain!